
--- Page 21 ---
Code
Competency
Chapter
Page no
AN 12.3
Identify and describe flexor retinaculum with its attachments
AN 12.4
Explain anatomical basis of carpal tunnel syndrome
AN 12.5
Identify and describe small muscles of hand. Also describe movements of thumb and
muscles involved
AN 12.6
Describe and demonstrate movements of thumb and muscles involved
AN 12.7
Identify and describe course and branches of important blood vessels and nerves in hand
AN 12.8
Describe anatomical basis of Claw hand
AN 12.9
Identify and describe fibrous flexor sheaths, ulnar bursa, radial bursa and digital
synovial sheaths
AN 12.10
Explain infection of fascial spaces of palm
AN 12.11
Identify, describe and demonstrate important muscle groups of dorsal forearm with
attachments, nerve supply and actions
AN 12.12
Identify and describe origin, course, relations, branches (or tributaries), termination of
important nerves and vessels of back of forearm
AN 12.13
Describe the anatomical basis of Wrist drop
AN 12.14
Identify and describe compartments deep to extensor retinaculum
AN 12.15
Identify and describe extensor expansion formation
AN 13.1
Describe and explain fascia of upper limb and compartments, veins of upper limb
and its lymphatic drainage
AN 13.2
Describe dermatomes of upper limb
AN 13.3
Identify and describe the type, articular surfaces, capsule, synovial membrane, ligaments,
relations, movements, blood and nerve supply of elbow joint, proximal and distal
radio-ulnar joints, wrist joint and first carpometacarpal joint
AN 13.4
Describe sternoclavicular joint, acromioclavicular joint, carpometacarpal joints and
155, 174
metacarpophalangeal joint
AN 13.5
Identify the bones and joints of upper limb seen in anteroposterior and lateral view
radiographs of shoulder region, arm, elbow, forearm and hand
AN 13.6
Identify and demonstrate important bony landmarks of upper limb: Jugular notch,
sternal angle, acromial angle, spine of the scapula, vertebral level of the medial end,
inferior angle of the scapula
AN 13.7
Identify and demonstrate surface projection of: Cephalic and basilic vein, palpation of
brachial artery, radial artery, testing of muscles: trapezius, pectoralis major, serratus anterior,
latissimus dorsi, deltoid, biceps brachii, brachioradialis
AN 13.8
Describe development of upper limb including its molecular regulation
Appendix 1
AN 21.1
Identify and describe the salient features of sternum, typical rib, Ist rib and typical
219, 221
thoracic vertebra
224, 229
AN 21.2
Identify and describe the features of 2nd , 12th ribs, 1st, 11th and 12th thoracic vertebrae
221, 222,
223, 231
AN 21.3
Describe and demonstrate the boundaries of thoracic inlet, and outlet
213, 215
AN 21.4
Describe and demonstrate extent, attachments, direction of fibres, nerve supply and
actions of intercostal muscles
AN 21.5
Describe and demonstrate origin, course, relations and branches of a typical intercostal nerve 14
AN 21.6
Mention origin, course and branches/ tributaries of:
1) anterior and posterior intercostal vessels
2) internal thoracic vessels
AN 21.7
Mention the origin, course, relations and branches of:
242, 245
1) atypical intercostal nerve
2) superior intercostal artery, subcostal artery
AN 21.8
Describe and demonstrate type, articular surfaces and movements of manubriosternal,
costovertebral, costotransverse and xiphisternal joints
AN 21.9
Describe and demonstrate mechanics and types of respiration
HUMAN ANATOMY—UPPER LIMB AND THORAX
--- Page 22 ---
Code
Competency
Chapter
Page no
AN 21.10
Describe costochondral and interchondral joints
AN 21.11
Mention boundaries and contents of the superior, anterior, middle and posterior
mediastinum
AN 22.1
Describe and demonstrate subdivisions, sinuses in pericardium, blood supply and nerve
supply of pericardium
AN 22.2
Describe and demonstrate external and internal features of each chamber of heart
AN 22.3
Describe and demonstrate origin, course and branches of coronary arteries
AN 22.4
Describe anatomical basis of ischaemic heart disease
AN 22.5
Describe and demonstrate the formation, course, tributaries and termination of
coronary sinus
AN 22.6
Describe the fibrous skeleton of heart
AN 22.7
Mention the parts, position and arterial supply of the conducting system of heart
AN 23.1
Describe and demonstrate the external appearance, relations, blood supply, nerve supply,
lymphatic drainage and applied anatomy of oesophagus
AN 23.2
Describe and demonstrate the extent, relations tributaries of thoracic duct and enumerate
its applied anatomy
AN 23.3
Describe and demonstrate origin, course, relations, tributaries and termination of
14, 19
249, 310
superior venacava, azygos, hemiazygos and accessory hemiazygos veins
AN 23.4
Mention the extent, branches and relations of arch of aorta and descending thoracic aorta
AN 23.5
Identify and Mention the location and extent of thoracic sympathetic chain
AN 23.6
Describe the splanchnic nerves
AN 23.7
Mention the extent, relations and applied anatomy of thoracic duct
AN 24.1
Mention the blood supply, lymphatic drainage and nerve supply of pleura, extent of
pleura and describe the pleural recesses and their applied anatomy
AN 24.2
Identify side, external features and relations of structures which form root of lung and
bronchial tree and their clinical correlate
AN 24.3
Describe a bronchopulmonary segment
AN 24.4
Identify phrenic nerve and describe its formation and distribution
AN 24.5
Mention the blood supply, lymphatic drainage and nerve supply of lungs
AN 24.6
Describe the extent, length, relations, blood supply, lymphatic drainage and nerve supply
of trachea
AN 25.1
Identify, draw and label a slide of trachea and lung and molecular regulation
AN 25.2
(a) Describe development of respiratory system
(b) Describe development of heart and molecular regulation
AN 25.3
Describe fetal circulation and changes occurring at birth
AN 25.4
Describe embryological basis of:
18, 20
306, 336
1) atrial septal defect
2) ventricular septal defect
3) Fallot’s tetralogy
4) tracheo-oesophageal fistula
AN 25.5
Describe developmental basis of congenital anomalies, transposition of great vessels,
dextrocardia, patent ductus arteriosus and coarctation of aorta
AN 25.6
Mention development of aortic arch arteries, SVC, IVC and coronary sinus
AN 25.7
Identify structures seen on a plain x-ray chest (PA view)
AN 25.8
Identify and describe in brief a barium swallow
AN 25.9
Demonstrate surface marking of lines of pleural reflection, lung borders and fissures,
trachea, heart borders, apex beat and surface projection of valves of heart
INDEX OF COMPETENCIES
--- Page 24 ---
Upper Limb
1. Introduction
2. Bones
3. Pectoral Region
4. Axilla
5. Back
6. Scapular Region
7. Cutaneous Nerves, Superficial Veins and Lymphatic Drainage
8. Arm
9. Forearm and Hand
 10. Joints of Upper Limb
 11. Surface Marking, Radiological Anatomy and
Comparison of Upper and Lower Limbs
Appendix 1: Nerves, Arteries and Clinical Terms
Spots on Upper Limb
--- Page 25 ---
Ichchak dana, bichchak dana, dane upar dana
Hands naache, feet naache, brain hai khushnama
Ichchak dana
Ulna upar radius ghoome—Ulna upar radius ghoome,
haath hai anjana
Ichchak dana
Pronators prone kare, supinators reverse kare,
midprone mai haath jud jayen aakhon ka lajana
Ichchak dana
Bolo kya—pronation, supination
Bolo kya—pronation, supination
--- Page 26 ---
The fore- and hindlimbs were evolved basically for
bearing the weight of the body and for locomotion as
is seen in quadrupeds, e.g. cows or dogs. The two pairs
of limbs are, therefore, built on the same basic principle.
Each limb is made up of a basal segment or girdle,
and a free part divided into proximal, middle and distal
segments. The girdle attaches the limb to the axial
skeleton. The distal segment carries five digits.
Table 1.1 shows homologous parts of upper and lower
limbs.
However, with the evolution of the erect posture in
man, the function of weight-bearing was taken over by
the lower limbs. Thus the upper limbs, especially the
hands, became free and gradually evolved into organs
having great manipulative skills.
This has become possible because of a wide range of
mobility at the shoulder. The whole upper limb works
as a jointed lever. The human hand is a grasping tool.
It is exquisitely adaptable to perform various complex
functions under the control of a large area of the brain.
The unique position of man as a master mechanic of
the animal world is because of the skilled movements
of his hands.
Introduction
One pronates while giving, and supinates while getting 
—Anonymous
PARTS OF THE UPPER LIMB
It has been seen that the upper limb is made up of
four parts: (1) Shoulder region; (2) arm or brachium;
(3) forearm or antebrachium; and (4) hand or manus.
Further subdivisions of these parts are given in Table
1.2 and Fig. 1.1.
Table 1.1: Homologous parts of the limbs
Upper limb
Lower limb
1. Shoulder girdle
Hip girdle
2. Shoulder joint
Hip joint
3. Arm with humerus
Thigh with femur
4. Elbow joint
Knee joint
5. Forearm with radius and ulna
Leg with tibia and fibula
6. Wrist joint
Ankle joint
7. Hand with
Foot with
a. Carpus
a. Tarsus
b. Metacarpus
b. Metatarsus
c. 5 digits
c. 5 digits
Fig. 1.1: Parts and 32 bones of the upper limb
--- Page 27 ---
UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
1 The shoulder region includes:
a. The pectoral or breast region on the front of the chest;
b. The axilla or armpit; and
c. The scapular region on the back comprising parts
around the scapula.
The bones of the shoulder girdle are the clavicle and
the scapula.
Of these, only the clavicle articulates with the axial
skeleton at the sternoclavicular joint. The scapula is
mobile and is held in position by muscles. The
clavicle and scapula articulate with each other at the
acromioclavicular joint.
2 The arm (upper arm or brachium) extends from the
shoulder to the elbow (cubitus). The bone of the arm
is the humerus. Its upper end meets the scapula and
forms the shoulder joint. The shoulder joint permits
movements of the arm.
3 The forearm (antebrachium) extends from the elbow
to the wrist. The bones of the forearm are the radius
and the ulna. At their upper ends, they meet the
lower end of the humerus to form the elbow joint.
Their lower ends meet the carpal bones to form the
wrist joint. The radius and ulna meet each other at
the radioulnar joints.
The elbow joint permits movements of the forearm,
namely flexion and extension. The radioulnar joints
permit rotatory movements of the forearm called
pronation and supination. In a mid-flexed elbow, the
palm faces upwards in supination and downwards
in pronation. During the movement of pronation, the
radius rotates around the ulna (see Fig. 10.23).
4 The hand (manus) includes:
a. The wrist or carpus, supported by 8 carpal bones
arranged in two rows.
b. The hand proper or metacarpus, supported by 5
metacarpal bones.
c. Five digits (thumb and four fingers). Each finger
is supported by three phalanges, but the thumb
has only 2 phalanges (there being 14 phalanges
in all).
The carpal bones form the wrist joint with the radius,
intercarpal joints with one another, and carpometa-
carpal joints with the metacarpals.
The phalanges form metacarpophalangeal joints with
the metacarpals and interphalangeal joints with one
another.
Movements of the hand are permitted chiefly at the
wrist joint. The thumb moves at the first carpometa-
carpal joint; where an exclusive movement of
opposition besides the other usual movements is
permitted. Each of the second to fifth digits moves at
metacarpophalangeal, proximal and distal inter-
phalangeal joints. Figure 1.2 and Flowchart 1.1 show
the lines of force transmission.
EVOLUTION OF UPPER LIMBS
The forelimbs have evolved from the pectoral fins of
fishes. In tetrapods (terrestrial/land vertebrates), all the
four limbs are used for supporting body weight, and for
locomotion. In arboreal (tree-dwelling) human ances-
tors, the forelimbs have been set free from their weight-
bearing function. The forelimbs, thus ‘emancipated’,
Table 1.2: Parts of the upper limb
Parts
Subdivisions
Bones
Joints
1. Shoulder region
a. Pectoral region on the
Bones of the shoulder girdle
• Sternoclavicular joint
front of the chest
a. Clavicle
• Acromioclavicular joint
b. Axilla or armpit
b. Scapula
c. Scapular region on the
back
2. Upper arm (arm or brachium)
Humerus
Shoulder joint
from shoulder to the elbow
(scapulohumeral joint)
3. Forearm (antebrachium)
a. Radius
• Elbow joint
from elbow to the wrist
b. Ulna
• Radioulnar joints
4. Hand
a. Wrist
Carpus, made up of
• Wrist joint
8 carpal bones
(radiocarpal joint)
• Intercarpal joints
b. Hand proper
Metacarpus, made up of
• Carpometacarpal joints
5 metacarpal bones
c. Five digits, numbered
14 phalanges—two for
• Intermetacarpal joints
from lateral to medial side
the thumb, and three for
First
= Thumb or pollex
each of the four fingers
• Metacarpophalangeal
Second = Index or forefinger
joints
Third
= Middle finger
• Proximal and distal
Fourth
= Ring finger
interphalangeal joints
Fifth
= Little finger
--- Page 28 ---
INTRODUCTION
Upper Limb
Section 1
disproportionate lengthening of the forearms, and also
in elongation of the palm and fingers.
STUDY OF ANATOMY
Before studying the anatomy of any region, it is usual
to begin by learning general features of the skin, the
superficial fascia and its contents, the deep fascia, the
bones, the muscles, joints, blood vessels and nerves.
All these are provided in BD Chaurasia’s Handbook of
General Anatomy, 6th edition. This is followed by the
study of the muscles of the region, and finally, the blood
vessels and nerves. These descriptions should be read
only after the part has been dissected with the help of
the steps of dissection provided in the book.
Before undertaking the study of any part of the body,
it is essential for the students to acquire some
knowledge of the bones of the region. It is for this reason
that a chapter on bones (osteology) is given at the
beginning of each section. While reading the chapter,
the students should palpate the various parts of bones
on themselves. The next chapter must be studied with
the help of loose human bones.
1. Make a flowchart to show lines of force transmission
in upper limb.
2. Tabulate the homologous parts of upper and lower
limbs.
3. Enumerate:
a. Subdivisions of shoulder region
b. Joints related to the forearm
c. Name of carpal bones in order
d. Joints of the hand
Flowchart 1.1: Lines of force transmission
acquired a wide range of mobility and were used for
prehension or grasping, feeling, picking, holding,
sorting, breaking, fighting, etc. These functions became
possible only after necessary structural modifications:
a. Appearance of joints permitting rotatory movements
of the forearm (described as supination and
pronation), as a result of which food could be picked
up and taken to the mouth.
b. Addition of the clavicle, which has evolved with the
function of prehension.
c. Rotation of the thumb through 90°, so that it can be
opposed to other digits for grasping.
d. Appropriate changes for free mobility of the fingers
and hand.
The primitive pentadactyl limb of amphibians,
terminating in five digits, has persisted through
evolution and is seen in man. In some other species,
however, the limbs were altogether lost, as in snakes;
while in others the digits were reduced in number as
in ungulates. The habit of brachiation, i.e. suspending
the body by the arms, in anthropoid apes resulted in
Fig. 1.2: Scheme of skeleton of upper limb showing lines of
force transmission
--- Page 29 ---
UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
Competency achievement: The student should be able to:
AN 8.1 Identify the given bone, its side, important features and
keep it in anatomical position.1
AN 8.2 Identify and describe joints formed by the given bone.2
INTRODUCTION
Out of 206 total bones in man, the upper limbs contain as
many as 64 bones. Each side consists of 32 bones, the
distribution of which is shown in Table 1.2 and
Fig. 1.1 (see Chapter 1). Since bones of the two upper limbs
are similar, one needs to learn only 32 bones out of a total
64 bones. This applies to soft parts as well. One learns only
one upper limb, the other upper limb gets learnt on its
own. This is true for the whole body except parts of
abdomen. Actually, one needs to master only 50% of the
body and other 50% gets mastered itself. The individual
bones of the upper limb will be described one by one.
Their features and attachments should be read with the
bones before undertaking the dissection of the part
concerned. The paragraphs on attachments should be
revised when the dissection of a particular region has been
completed.
Competency achievement: The student should be able to:
AN 8.3 Enumerate peculiarities of clavicle.3
CLAVICLE
The clavicle (Latin a small key) is a long bone. It supports
the shoulder so that the arm can swing clearly away
from the trunk. The clavicle transmits the weight of the
limb to the sternum. The bone has a curved part called
the shaft, and two ends, lateral and medial.
Side Determination
The side to which a clavicle belongs can be determined
from the following characters.
Bones
Palpation of ulnar nerve behind medial epicondyle of humerus makes some persons smile, that is why the bone is called humerus 
—Anonymous
1 The lateral end is flat, and the medial end is large
and quadrilateral.
2 The shaft is slightly curved, so that it is convex
forwards in its medial two-thirds, and concave
forwards in its lateral one-third.
3 The inferior surface is grooved longitudinally in its
middle one-third.
Peculiarities of the Clavicle
1 It is the only long bone that lies horizontally.
2 It is subcutaneous throughout.
3 It is the first bone to start ossifying.
4 It is the only long bone which ossifies in membrane.
5 It is the only long bone which has two primary centres
of ossification.
6 There is no medullary cavity.
7 It is occasionally pierced by the middle supraclavicular
nerve.
It receives weight of upper limb via lateral one-third
through coracoclavicular ligament and transmits
weight of upper limb to the axial skeleton via medial
two-thirds part (see Flowchart 1.1).
Features
Shaft
The shaft (Figs 2.1a and b) is divisible into the lateral
one-third and the medial two-thirds.
The lateral one-third of the shaft is flattened from above
downwards. It has two borders—anterior and
posterior. The anterior border is concave forwards. The
posterior border is convex backwards. This part of the
bone has two surfaces—superior and inferior. The
superior surface is subcutaneous and the inferior surface
presents an elevation called the conoid (Greek cone)
tubercle and a ridge called the trapezoid ridge.
The medial two-thirds of the shaft is rounded and
is said to have four surfaces. The anterior surface is
convex forwards. The posterior surface is smooth. The
superior surface is rough in its medial part. The inferior
--- Page 30 ---
BONES
Upper Limb
Section 1
surface has a rough oval impression at the medial end.
The lateral half of this surface has a longitudinal
subclavian groove. The nutrient foramen lies at the lateral
end of the groove.
Lateral and Medial Ends
1 The lateral or acromial (Greek peak of shoulder) end
is flattened from above downwards. It bears a facet
that articulates with the acromion process of the
scapula to form the acromioclavicular joint.
2 The medial or sternal end is quadrangular and
articulates with the clavicular notch of the
manubrium sterni to form the sternoclavicular joint.
The articular surface extends to the inferior aspect,
for articulation with the first costal cartilage.
Competency achievement: The student should be able to:
AN 8.4 Demonstrate important muscle attachments on the given
bone.4
Attachments
1 At the lateral end, the margin of the articular surface
for its acromioclavicular joint gives attachment to the
joint capsule.
2 At the medial end, the margin of the articular surface
for the sternum gives attachment to:
a. Fibrous capsule of sternoclavicular joint all around
(Figs 2.2a and b).
b. Articular disc posterosuperiorly.
c. Interclavicular ligament superiorly.
Figs 2.1a and b: General features of right clavicle: (a) Superior aspect, and (b) inferior aspect
Figs 2.2a and b: Attachments of right clavicle: (a) Superior aspect, and (b) inferior aspect
--- Page 31 ---
UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
Fig. 2.4: Fracture of clavicle
3 Lateral one-third of shaft
a. The anterior border gives origin to the deltoid
muscle (Fig. 2.2a).
b. The posterior border provides insertion to the
trapezius muscle.
c. The conoid tubercle and trapezoid ridge give
attachment to the conoid and trapezoid parts of the
coracoclavicular ligament (Fig. 2.2b).
4 Medial two-thirds of the shaft
a. Most of the anterior surface gives origin to the
pectoralis major (Figs 2.2a and b).
b. Half of the rough superior surface gives origin to
the clavicular head of the sternocleidomastoid
(Fig. 2.2a).
c. The oval impression on the inferior surface at the
medial end gives attachment to the costoclavicular
ligament (Fig. 2.2b).
d. The subclavian groove gives insertion to the
subclavius muscle. The margins of the groove give
attachment to the clavipectoral fascia.
e. The posterior surface close to medial end gives
origin to sternohyoid muscle.
f. The subclavian vessels and divisions of trunks of
brachial plexus pass towards the axilla lying
between the inferior surface of the clavicle and
upper surface of first rib. Subclavius muscle acts
as a cushion.
The nutrient foramen transmits a branch of the
suprascapular artery.
OSSIFICATION
• The clavicle is the first bone in the body to ossify
(Fig. 2.3). Except for its medial end, it ossifies in
membrane. It ossifies from two primary centres
and one secondary centre.
• The two primary centres appear in the shaft
between the fifth and sixth weeks of intrauterine
life, and fuse about the 45th day.
• The secondary centre for the medial end appears
during 15–17 years, and fuses with the shaft
during 21–22 years. Occasionally, there may be a
secondary centre for the acromial end.
Fig. 2.3: Ossification of clavicle
CLINICAL ANATOMY
• The clavicle is commonly fractured by falling on
the outstretched hand (indirect violence). The
most common site of fracture is the junction
between the two curvatures of the bone, which is
the weakest point. The lateral fragment is
displaced downwards by the weight of the limb
as trapezius muscle alone is unable to support the
weight of upper limb (Fig. 2.4).
• The clavicles may be congenitally absent, or
imperfectly developed in a disease called
cleidocranial dysostosis. In this condition, the
shoulders droop, and can be approximated
anteriorly in front of the chest (Figs 2.5a and b).
Competency achievement: The student should be able to:
AN 8.4 Demonstrate important muscle attachment on the given
bone.5
SCAPULA
The scapula (Latin shoulder blade) is a thin bone placed
on the posterolateral aspect of the thoracic cage. The
scapula has two surfaces, three borders, three angles,
and three processes (Fig. 2.6).
Side Determination
1 The lateral or glenoid (Greek socket) angle is large
and bears the glenoid cavity.
2 The dorsal surface is convex and is divided by the
triangular spine into the supraspinous and
infraspinous fossae. The costal surface is occupied
by the concave subscapular fossa to fit on the convex
chest wall (Figs 2.6 and 2.7).
3 The thickest lateral border runs from the glenoid
cavity above to the inferior angle below.
--- Page 32 ---
BONES
Upper Limb
Section 1
Features
Surfaces
1 The costal surface or subscapular fossa is concave and
is directed medially and forwards. It is marked by
three longitudinal ridges. Another thick ridge adjoins
the lateral border. This part of the bone is almost
rod-like. It acts as a lever for the action of the serratus
anterior in overhead abduction of the arm.
2 The dorsal surface gives attachment to the spine of
the scapula which divides the surface into a smaller
supraspinous fossa and a larger infraspinous fossa. The
two fossae are connected by the spinoglenoid notch,
situated lateral to the root of the spine.
Borders
1 The superior border is shortest. Near the root of the
coracoid process, it presents the suprascapular notch.
2 The lateral border is thick. At the upper end, it presents
the infraglenoid tubercle.
3 The medial border is thin. It extends from the superior
angle to the inferior angle.
Angles
1 The superior angle is covered by the trapezius.
2 The inferior angle is covered by the latissimus dorsi. It
moves forwards round the chest when the arm is
abducted.
3 The lateral or glenoid angle is broad and bears the
glenoid cavity or fossa, which is directed forwards,
laterally and slightly upwards (Fig. 2.7). A supra-
glenoid tubercle is present above the glenoid cavity.
Processes
1 The spine or spinous process is a triangular plate of
bone with three borders and two surfaces. It divides
the dorsal surface of the scapula into the
supraspinous and infraspinous fossae. Its posterior
border is called the crest of the spine. The crest has
upper and lower lips.
2 The acromion process has two borders, medial and
lateral; two surfaces, superior and inferior; and a
facet for the clavicle (Fig. 2.7).
3 The coracoid (Greek like a crow’s beak) process is
directed forwards and slightly laterally. It is bent and
finger-like. It is an atavistic type of epiphysis.
Attachments
1 The multipennate subscapularis muscle arises from
the medial two-thirds of the subscapular fossa
(Figs 2.8 and 6.4).
2 The supraspinatus arises from the medial two-thirds
of the supraspinous fossa including the upper
surface of the spine (Fig. 2.9).
3 The infraspinatus arises from the medial two-thirds
of the infraspinous fossa, including the lower
surface of the spine (Fig. 2.9).
4 The deltoid arises from the lower border of the crest
of the spine and from the lateral border of the acromion
(Fig. 2.10). The acromial fibres are multipennate.
5 The trapezius is inserted into the upper border of
the crest of the spine and into the medial border of
the acromion process (Fig. 2.10).
6 The serratus anterior is inserted along the medial
border of the costal surface: One digitation from the
superior angle to the root of spine, two digitations
to the medial border, and five digitations to the
inferior angle (Fig. 2.8).
7 The long head of the biceps brachii arises from the
supraglenoid tubercle; and the short head from the
lateral part of the tip of the coracoid process.
8 The coracobrachialis arises from the medial part of
the tip of the coracoid process.
Figs 2.5a and b: Cleidocranial dysostosis: (a) Clavicles
absent on both sides, and (b) shoulders approximated
--- Page 33 ---
UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
Fig. 2.6: General features of right scapula: Costal surface
Fig. 2.7: General features of right scapula: Dorsal surface
--- Page 35 ---
UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
9 The pectoralis minor is inserted into the medial
border and superior surface of the coracoid process
(Fig. 2.8).
10 The long head of the triceps brachii arises from the
infraglenoid tubercle.
11 The teres minor arises by two slips from the upper
two-thirds of the rough strip on the dorsal surface
along the lateral border (Fig. 2.9). Circumflex
scapular artery lies between the two slips.
12 The teres major arises from the lower one-third of
the rough strip on the dorsal aspect of the lateral
border (Fig. 2.9). Latissimus dorsi arises from
inferior angle.
13 The levator scapulae is inserted along the dorsal
aspect of the medial border, from the superior angle
up to the root of the spine (Fig. 2.9).
14 The rhomboid minor is inserted into the medial
border (dorsal aspect) opposite the root of the spine
(Fig. 2.9).
15 The rhomboid major is inserted into the medial
border (dorsal aspect) between the root of the spine
and the inferior angle.
16 The inferior belly of the omohyoid arises from the
upper border near the suprascapular notch (Fig. 2.8).
17 The margin of the glenoid cavity gives attachment
to the capsule of the shoulder joint and to the
glenoidal labrum (Latin lip) (Fig. 2.8).
18 The margin of the facet on the medial aspect of the
acromion process gives attachment to the capsule of
the acromioclavicular joint (Fig. 2.10).
19 The coracoacromial ligament is attached: (a) to the
lateral border of the coracoid process, and (b) to the
medial side of the tip of the acromion process
(Figs 2.10 and 6.7).
20 The coracohumeral ligament is attached to the root
of the coracoid process (Fig. 2.10).
21 The coracoclavicular ligament is attached to the
coracoid process: The trapezoid part on the superior
aspect, and the conoid part near the root (Fig. 2.10).
22 The transverse ligament bridges across the supra-
scapular notch and converts it into a foramen which
transmits the suprascapular nerve. The suprascapular
vessels lie above the ligament (Fig. 2.10).
23 The spinoglenoid ligament may bridge the spino-
glenoid notch. The suprascapular vessels and nerve
pass deep to it (Fig. 10.3).
OSSIFICATION
• The scapula ossifies from one primary centre
and seven secondary centres.
• The primary centre appears near the glenoid
cavity during the eighth week of development.
• The first secondary centre appears in the middle
of the coracoid process during the first year and
fuses by the 15th year. The subcoracoid centre
appears in the root of the coracoid process
during the 10th year and fuses by the 16th to
18th years (Fig. 2.11).
• The other centres, including two for the
acromion process, one for the lower two-thirds
of the margin of the glenoid cavity, one for the
medial border and one for the inferior angle,
appear at puberty and fuse by the 25th year.
• The fact of practical importance is concerned with
the acromion process. If the two centres appearing
for acromion process fail to unite, it may be
interpreted as a fracture on radiological examina-
tion. In such cases, a radiograph of the opposite
acromion process will mostly reveal similar failure
of union.
Fig. 2.10: Right scapula: Superior aspect
--- Page 36 ---
BONES
Upper Limb
Section 1
CLINICAL ANATOMY
• Paralysis of the serratus anterior causes ‘winging’
of the scapula. The medial border of the bone
becomes unduly prominent, and the arm cannot
be abducted beyond 90° (Fig. 2.12).
• The scaphoid scapula is a developmental anomaly,
in which the medial border is concave.
Side Determination
1 The upper end is rounded to form the head. The
lower end is expanded from side-to-side and
flattened from before backwards.
2 The head is directed medially, upwards and
backwards.
3 The lesser tubercle projects from the front of the
upper end and is limited laterally by the
intertubercular sulcus or bicipital groove.
Features
Upper End
1 The head is directed medially, backwards and
upwards. It articulates with the glenoid cavity of the
scapula to form the shoulder joint. The head forms
about one-third of a sphere and is much larger than
the glenoid cavity.
2 The line separating the head from the rest of the
upper end is called the anatomical neck.
3 The lesser tubercle (Latin lump) is an elevation on the
anterior aspect of the upper end (Fig. 2.13a).
4 The greater tubercle is an elevation that forms the
lateral part of the upper end. Its upper and posterior
aspect is marked by three impressions—upper,
middle and lower.
5 The intertubercular sulcus or bicipital groove separates
the lesser tubercle medially from the anterior part of
the greater tubercle. The sulcus has medial and lateral
lips that represent downward prolongations of the
lesser and greater tubercles.
6 The narrow line separating the upper end of the
humerus from the shaft is called the surgical neck
(Fig. 2.13b).
7 Morphological neck lies 0.5 cm below surgical neck.
It shows the position of epiphyseal line (Fig. 2.13b).
Fig. 2.11: Ossification of scapula
HUMERUS
The humerus is the bone of the arm. It is the longest
bone of the upper limb. It has an upper rounded end, a
lower flattened end and a shaft (Figs 2.13 and 2.14).
Fig. 2.12: Winging of right scapula
--- Page 37 ---
UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
Shaft
The shaft is rounded in the upper half and triangular in
the lower half. It has three borders and three surfaces.
Borders
1 The upper one-third of the anterior border forms the
lateral lip of the intertubercular sulcus. In its middle
part, it forms the anterior margin of the deltoid
tuberosity. The lower half of the anterior border is
smooth and rounded.
2 The lateral border is prominent only at the lower end
where it forms the lateral supracondylar ridge. In the
upper part, it is barely traceable up to the posterior
surface of the greater tubercle. In the middle part, it
is interrupted by the radial or spiral groove (Fig. 2.13b).
3 The upper part of the medial border forms the medial
lip of the intertubercular sulcus. About its middle, it
presents a rough strip. It is continuous below with
the medial supracondylar ridge.
Surfaces
1 The anterolateral surface lies between the anterior and
lateral borders. The upper half of this surface is covered
by the deltoid. A little above the middle, it is marked
Figs 2.13a and b: General features of right humerus: (a) Seen from front, and (b) seen from back
--- Page 38 ---
BONES
Upper Limb
Section 1
by a V-shaped deltoid (Greek triangular-shaped)
tuberosity. Behind the deltoid tuberosity, the radial groove
runs downwards and forwards across the surface.
2 The anteromedial surface lies between the anterior and
medial borders. Its upper one-third is narrow and
forms the floor of the intertubercular sulcus. A
nutrient foramen is seen near the medial border
below its middle part (Fig. 2.13a).
3 The posterior surface lies between the medial and
lateral borders. Its upper part is marked by an
oblique ridge. The middle one-third is crossed by
the radial groove (Fig. 2.13b).
Lower End
The lower end of the humerus forms the condyle which
is expanded from side-to-side, and has articular and
non-articular parts. The articular part includes the
following.
1 The capitulum (Latin little head) is a rounded
projection which articulates with the head of the
radius (Fig. 2.13a).
Figs 2.14a and b: Attachments of right humerus: (a) Anterior view, and (b) posterior view
--- Page 39 ---
UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
2 The trochlea (Greek pulley) is a pulley-shaped
surface. It articulates with the trochlear notch of
the ulna. The medial edge of the trochlea projects
down 6 mm more than the lateral edge—this
results in the formation of the carrying angle
(see Fig. 10.14).
The non-articular part includes the following.
1 The medial epicondyle is a prominent bony projection
on the medial side of the lower end. It is sub-
cutaneous and is easily felt on the medial side of the
elbow (Fig. 2.13a).
2 The lateral epicondyle is smaller than the medial
epicondyle. Its anterolateral part has a muscular
impression.
3 The sharp lateral margin just above the lower end is
called the lateral supracondylar ridge.
4 The medial supracondylar ridge is a similar ridge on
the medial side.
5 The coronoid fossa is a depression just above the
anterior aspect of the trochlea. It accommodates the
coronoid process of the ulna when the elbow is flexed
(Fig. 2.13a).
6 The radial fossa is a depression present just above the
anterior aspect of the capitulum. It accommodates
the head of the radius when the elbow is flexed.
7 The olecranon (Greek ulna head) fossa lies just above
the posterior aspect of the trochlea. It accommodates
the olecranon process of the ulna when the elbow is
extended (Fig. 2.13b).
Attachments
1 The multipennate subscapularis is inserted into the
lesser tubercle (Fig. 2.14a).
2 The supraspinatus is inserted into the uppermost
impression on the greater tubercle.
3 The infraspinatus is inserted into the middle
impression on the greater tubercle (Fig. 2.14b).
4 The teres minor is inserted into the lower impression
on the greater tubercle (Fig. 2.14b).
5 The pectoralis major is inserted into the lateral lip
of the intertubercular sulcus. The insertion is
bilaminar (Figs 2.14a and b).
6 The latissimus dorsi is inserted into the floor of the
intertubercular sulcus.
7 The teres major is inserted into the medial lip of the
intertubercular sulcus.
8 The contents of the intertubercular sulcus are:
a. The tendon of the long head of the biceps brachii, and
its synovial sheath.
b. The ascending branch of the anterior circumflex
humeral artery.
9 The deltoid is inserted into the deltoid tuberosity
(Figs 2.14a and b).
10 The coracobrachialis is inserted into the rough area
on the middle of the medial border.
11 The brachialis arises from the lower halves of the
anteromedial and anterolateral surfaces of the shaft.
Part of the area extends onto the posterior aspect
(Figs 2.14a and b).
12 The brachioradialis arises from the upper two-thirds
of the lateral supracondylar ridge (Figs 2.14a and b).
13 The extensor carpi radialis longus arises from the
lower one-third of the lateral supracondylar ridge.
14 The pronator teres (humeral head) arises from the
lower one-third of the medial supracondylar ridge.
15 The superficial flexor muscles of the forearm arise by
a common origin from the anterior aspect of the medial
epicondyle. This is called the common flexor origin.
16 The superficial extensor muscles of the forearm and
supinator have a common origin from the lateral
epicondyle. This is called the common extensor origin.
17 The anconeus (Greek elbow) arises from the posterior
surface of the lateral epicondyle (Fig. 2.14b).
18 Lateral head of triceps brachii arises from oblique
ridge on the upper part of posterior surface above
the radial groove, while its medial head arises from
posterior surface below the radial groove.
19 The capsular ligament of the shoulder joint is
attached to the anatomical neck except on the medial
side where the line of attachment dips down by
about 2 centimetres to include a small area of the
shaft within the joint cavity. The line is interrupted
at the intertubercular sulcus to provide an aperture
through which the tendon of the long head of the
biceps brachii leaves the joint cavity (Fig. 2.14a).
20 The capsular ligament of the elbow joint is attached
to the lower end along a line that reaches the upper
limits of the radial and coronoid fossae anteriorly;
and of the olecranon fossa posteriorly; so that these
fossae lie within the joint cavity. Medially, the line
of attachment passes between the medial epicondyle
and the trochlea. On the lateral side, it passes
between the lateral epicondyle and the capitulum
(Figs 2.14a and b).
21 Three nerves are directly related to the humerus and
are, therefore, liable to injury—the axillary nerve at the
surgical neck, the radial nerve at the radial groove, and the
ulnar nerve behind the medial epicondyle (Fig. 2.15).
OSSIFICATION
• The humerus ossifies from one primary centre and
seven secondary centres.
• The primary centre appears in the middle of the
diaphysis during the 8th week of development.
• The upper end ossifies from three secondary
centres—one for the head (first year), one for the
--- Page 40 ---
BONES
Upper Limb
Section 1
Figs 2.17a and b: Relationship of lateral epicondyle,
olecranon process and medial epicondyle in: (a) Flexed elbow,
and (b) extended elbow
Fig. 2.15: Relation of axillary, radial and ulnar nerves to the back
of humerus
greater tubercle (second year), and one for the
lesser tubercle (fifth year). The three centres fuse
together during the sixth year to form one
compound epiphysis, which fuses with the shaft
during the 20th year. The epiphyseal line encircles
the bone at the level of the lowest margin of the
head. This is the growing end of the bone.
(Remember that the nutrient foramen is always
directed away from the growing end.)
• The lower end ossifies from four centres which
form two epiphyses. The centres include one for
the capitulum and the lateral flange of the trochlea
(first year), one for the medial flange of the
trochlea (9th year), and one for the lateral
epicondyle (12th year). All three fuse during the
14th year to form another compound epiphysis,
which fuses with the shaft at about 16 years.
• The centre for the medial epicondyle appears
during 4–6 years, forms a separate epiphysis, and
fuses with the shaft during the 20th year.
CLINICAL ANATOMY
• The common sites of fracture of humerus are the
surgical neck, shaft and supracondylar region.
• Supracondylar fracture is common in young age. It
is produced by a fall on the outstretched hand.
The lower fragment is mostly displaced back-
wards, so that the elbow is unduly prominent, as
in dislocation of the elbow joint. This fracture may
cause injury to the median nerve. It may also lead
to Volkmann’s ischaemic contracture caused by
occlusion of the brachial artery (Figs 2.16a and b).
• The three bony points of the normal elbow form
the equilateral triangle in a flexed elbow and are
in one line in an extended elbow (Figs 2.17a and b).
Figs 2.16a and b: (a) Supracondylar fracture of humerus, and
(b) Volkmann’s ischaemic contracture
--- Page 41 ---
UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
• The humerus has a poor blood supply at the
junction of its upper one-third and lower two-
thirds. Fractures at this site show delayed union
or non-union.
• The head of the humerus commonly dislocates
inferiorly (subglenoid) (Fig. 2.18).
RADIUS
The radius is the lateral bone of the forearm, and is
homologous with the tibia of the lower limb. It has an
upper rounded end, a lower broad end with a styloid
process and a shaft.
Side Determination
1 Upper end is having disc-shaped head, a narrow
neck while lower end is expanded with a styloid
process. Close to neck, it presents a radial tuberosity.
2 At the lower end, the anterior surface is in the form
of thick prominent ridge. While the posterior surface
presents four grooves for the extensor tendons.
3 Lower end presents a tubercle on the posterior
surface called as dorsal tubercle of Lister.
4 The sharpest border of the shaft is the medial border.
Features
Upper End
1 The head is disc-shaped and is covered with hyaline
cartilage (Fig. 2.19). It has a superior concave surface
which articulates with the capitulum of the humerus
at the elbow joint. The circumference of the head is
also articular. It fits into a socket formed by the radial
notch of the ulna and the annular ligament, thus
forming the superior radioulnar joint.
2 The neck is enclosed by the narrow lower margin of
the annular ligament. The head and neck are free
from capsular attachment and can rotate freely
within the socket.
3 The radial tuberosity lies just below the medial part
of the neck. It has a rough posterior part and a
smooth anterior part.
Shaft
It has three borders and three surfaces (Fig. 2.20).
Borders
1 The anterior border extends from the anterior margin
of the radial tuberosity down close to the styloid
process. It is oblique in the upper half of the shaft,
and vertical in the lower half. The lowest part is sharp
and crest-like. The oblique part is called the anterior
oblique line (Fig. 2.19).
2 The posterior border is the mirror image of the anterior
border, but is clearly defined only in its middle one-
third. The upper oblique part is known as the posterior
oblique line (Fig. 2.20).
3 The medial or interosseous border is the sharpest of the
three borders. It extends from the radial tuberosity
above to the posterior margin of the ulnar notch
below. The interosseous membrane is attached to its
lower three-fourths (Fig. 2.21a). In its lower part, it
forms the posterior margin of an elongated triangular
area (Fig. 2.22).
Surfaces
1 The anterior surface lies between the anterior and
interosseous borders. A nutrient foramen opens in
its upper part, and is directed upwards. The nutrient
artery is a branch of the anterior interosseous artery
(Fig. 2.19).
2 The posterior surface lies between the posterior and
interosseous borders.
3 The lateral surface lies between the anterior and
posterior borders. It shows a roughened area in its
middle part.
Lower End
The lower end is the widest part of the bone. It has
five surfaces.
1 The anterior surface is in the form of a thick
prominent ridge. The radial artery is palpated against
this surface.
2 The posterior surface presents four grooves for the
extensor tendons. The dorsal tubercle of Lister lies
lateral to an oblique groove (Fig. 2.20).
3 The medial surface is occupied by the ulnar notch for
the head of the ulna (Fig. 2.20).
4 The lateral surface is prolonged downwards to form
the styloid (Greek pillar) process (Fig. 2.20).
Fig. 2.18: Inferior dislocation of humerus
--- Page 42 ---
BONES
Upper Limb
Section 1
Fig. 2.20: Features of right radius and ulna, posterior aspect
Fig. 2.19: Features of anterior surfaces of radius and ulna
Figs 2.21a and b: (a) Radius (R) and ulna (U) in transverse section, and (b) tendons in six compartments/grooves (1–6) under the
extensor retinaculum
--- Page 43 ---
UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
5 The inferior surface bears a triangular area for the
scaphoid bone, and a medial quadrangular area for
the lunate bone. This surface takes part in forming
the wrist joint (see Fig. 10.24).
Attachments
1 The biceps (Latin two heads) brachii is inserted into
the rough posterior part of the radial tuberosity. The
anterior part of the radial tuberosity is covered by a
bursa (Figs 2.22 and 8.4).
2 The supinator (Latin to bend back) is inserted into
the upper part of the lateral surface (Fig. 2.23).
3 The pronator teres is inserted into the middle of the
lateral surface (Fig. 2.22).
4 The brachioradialis is inserted into the lowest part
of the lateral surface just above the styloid process
(Fig. 2.22).
5 The radial head of the flexor digitorum superficialis
takes origin from the anterior oblique line and the
upper part of anterior border (Fig. 2.22).
6 The flexor pollicis (Latin thumb) longus takes origin
from the upper two-thirds of the anterior surface
(Fig. 2.22).
7 The pronator quadratus is inserted into the lower
part of the anterior surface and into the triangular
area on the medial side of the lower end. The radial
artery is palpated for ‘radial pulse’, as it lies on the
Fig. 2.22: Attachments of right radius and ulna: Anterior aspect
Fig. 2.23: Attachments of right radius and ulna: Posterior aspect
--- Page 44 ---
BONES
Upper Limb
Section 1
pronator quadratus medial to the sharp anterior
border of radius, lateral to the tendon of flexor carpi
radialis.
8 The abductor pollicis longus and the extensor pollicis
brevis arise from the posterior surface (Fig. 2.23).
9 The quadrate ligament is attached to the medial part
of the neck.
10 The oblique cord is attached on the medial side just
below the radial tuberosity (Fig. 2.22).
11 The articular capsule of the wrist joint is attached
to the anterior and posterior margins of the inferior
articular surface.
12 The articular disc of the inferior radioulnar joint is
attached to the lower border of the ulnar notch
(see Fig. 10.24).
13 The extensor retinaculum is attached to the lower
part of the sharp anterior border (see Fig. 9.52b).
14 The interosseous membrane is attached to the lower
three-fourths of the interosseous border.
15 The first groove between sharp crest-like lowest
part of anterior border and styloid process gives
passage to abductor pollicis longus and extensor
pollicis brevis (Fig. 2.21b).
16 The second groove between styloid process and
dorsal tubercle gives way to extensor carpi radialis
longus and extensor carpi radialis brevis tendons.
17 The third oblique groove medial to dorsal tubercle
gives passage to extensor pollicis longus tendon.
18 The fourth groove on the medial aspect gives
passage to tendons of extensor digitorum, extensor
indicis, posterior interosseous nerve and anterior
interosseous artery.
19 In addition, at the junction of lower ends of radius
and ulna, the fifth groove gives passage to the
tendon of extensor digiti minimi.
20 Lastly in relation to ulna, between its head and
styloid process is the sixth groove, traversed by the
tendon of extensor carpi ulnaris (Fig. 2.21b).
These are six compartments/grooves under extensor
retinaculum of wrist, four are in relation to radius, 5th
at the junction of radius and ulna and 6th on the ulna
itself between its head and styloid process (Fig. 2.21b).
OSSIFICATION
• The shaft of radius ossifies from a primary centre
which appears during the 8th week of development.
• The lower end ossifies from a secondary centre
which appears during the first year and fuses with
shaft at 20th year; it is the growing end of the bone.
• The upper end (head) ossifies from a secondary
centre which appears during the 4th year and fuses
with shaft at 18th year (Table 2.1).
CLINICAL ANATOMY
• The radius commonly gets fractured about 2 cm
above its lower end (Colles’ fracture). This fracture
is caused by a fall on the outstretched hand
(Fig. 2.24a). The distal fragment is displaced
upwards and backwards, and the radial styloid
process comes to lie proximal to the ulnar styloid
process. (It normally lies distal to the ulnar styloid
process.) If the distal fragment gets displaced
anteriorly, it is called Smith’s fracture (Fig. 2.24b).
• A sudden powerful jerk on the hand of a child may
dislodge the head of the radius from the grip of the
annular ligament. This is known as subluxation of
the head of the radius (pulled elbow) (Figs 2.25a and
b). The head can normally be felt in a hollow behind
the lateral epicondyle of the humerus.
Figs 2.24a and b: (a) Colles’ fracture with dinner fork
deformity, and (b) Smith’s fracture
Figs 2.25a and b: (a) Position of bones, and (b) pulled elbow
--- Page 45 ---
UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
ULNA
The ulna is the medial bone of the forearm, and is
homologous with the fibula of the lower limb. It has an
upper end with two processes, a shaft and a narrow
rounded lower end.
Side Determination
1 The upper end is hook-like, with its concavity
directed forwards.
2 The lateral border of the shaft is sharp and crest-like.
3 Pointed styloid process lies posteromedial to the
rounded head of ulna at its lower end.
Features
Upper End
The upper end presents the olecranon and coronoid
processes, and the trochlear and radial notches (Fig. 2.19).
1 The olecranon process projects upwards from the shaft.
It has superior, anterior, posterior, medial and lateral
surfaces.
• The anterior surface is articular, it forms the upper
part of the trochlear notch (Fig. 2.19).
• The posterior surface forms a triangular sub-
cutaneous area which is separated from the skin
by a bursa. Inferiorly, it is continuous with the
posterior border of the shaft of the ulna (Fig. 2.20).
Its upper part forms the point of the elbow.
• The medial surface is continuous inferiorly with the
medial surface of the shaft.
• The lateral surface is smooth, continues as posterior
surface of shaft.
• The superior surface in its posterior part shows a
roughened area.
2 The coronoid (Greek like crow’s beak) process projects
forwards from the shaft just below the olecranon
process and has four surfaces, namely superior,
anterior, medial and lateral.
• The superior surface forms the lower part of the
trochlear notch.
• The anterior surface is triangular and rough. Its
lower corner forms the ulnar tuberosity.
• The upper part of its lateral surface is marked by
the radial notch for the head of the radius. The
annular ligament is attached to the anterior and
posterior margins of the notch. The lower part of
the lateral surface forms a depressed area to
accommodate the radial tuberosity. It is limited
behind by a ridge called the supinator crest (Fig. 2.26).
• Medial surface is continuous with medial surface
of the shaft.
3 The trochlear notch forms an articular surface that
articulates with the trochlea of the humerus to form
the elbow joint.
4 The radial notch articulates with the head of the radius
to form the superior radioulnar joint (Fig. 2.26).
Shaft
The shaft has three borders and three surfaces
(Fig. 2.21).
Borders
1 The interosseous or lateral border is the sharpest in its
middle two-fourths. Inferiorly, it can be traced to the
lateral side of the head. Superiorly, it is continuous
with the supinator crest.
2 The anterior border is thick and rounded. It begins
above on the medial side of the ulnar tuberosity,
passes backwards in its lower one-third, and
terminates at the medial side of the styloid process.
3 The posterior border is subcutaneous. It begins, above,
at the apex of the triangular subcutaneous area at
the back of the olecranon process, and terminates at
the base of the styloid process (Fig. 2.20).
Surfaces
1 The anterior surface lies between the anterior and
interosseous borders. A nutrient foramen is seen on
the upper part of this surface. It is directed upwards.
The nutrient artery is derived from the anterior
interosseous artery (Fig. 2.19).
2 The medial surface lies between the anterior and
posterior borders (Fig. 2.19).
3 The posterior surface lies between the posterior and
interosseous borders. It is subdivided into three areas
by two lines. An oblique line divides it into upper
and lower parts. The lower part is further divided
by a vertical line into a medial and a lateral area.
Lower End
The lower end is made up of the head and the styloid
process. The head articulates with the ulnar notch of
the radius to form the inferior radioulnar joint. It is
separated from the wrist joint by the articular disc
Fig. 2.26: Features of upper end of ulna
--- Page 46 ---
BONES
Upper Limb
Section 1
15 The annular ligament of the superior radioulnar
joint is attached to the two margins of radial notch
of ulna (Fig. 2.26).
16 The ulnar collateral ligament of the wrist is attached
to the styloid process.
17 The articular disc of the inferior radioulnar joint is
attached by its apex to a small rough area just lateral
to the styloid process (see Fig. 10.24).
OSSIFICATION
• The shaft and most of the upper end of ulna ossify
from a primary centre which appears during the
8th week of development.
• The superior part of the olecranon process ossifies
from a secondary centre which appears during the
10th year. It forms a scale-like epiphysis which
joins the rest of the bone by 16th year.
• The lower end ossifies from a secondary centre
which appears during the 5th year, and joins with
the shaft by 18th year. This is the growing end of
the bone (Table 2.1).
CLINICAL ANATOMY
• The ulna is the stabilising bone of the forearm,
with its trochlear notch gripping the lower end of
the humerus. On this foundation, the radius can
pronate and supinate for efficient working of the
upper limb.
• The shaft of the ulna may fracture either alone or
along with that of the radius. Cross-union between
the radius and ulna must be prevented to preserve
pronation and supination of the hand.
• Dislocation of the elbow is produced by a fall on the
outstretched hand with the elbow slightly flexed.
The olecranon process shifts posteriorly and the
elbow is fixed in slight flexion.
Normally, in an extended elbow, the tip of the
olecranon process lies in a horizontal line with the
two epicondyles of the humerus; and in the flexed
elbow, the three bony points form an equilateral
triangle (Figs 2.17a and b). These relations are
disturbed in dislocation of the elbow.
• Fracture of the olecranon process is common and is
caused by a fall on the point of the elbow. Fracture
of the coronoid process is uncommon, and usually
accompanies dislocation of the elbow.
• Madelung’s deformity is dorsal subluxation
(displacement) of the lower end of the ulna, due
to retarded growth of the lower end of the radius
(Fig. 2.27).
(see Fig. 10.24). Ulnar artery and nerve lie on the anterior
aspect of head of ulna.
The styloid process projects downwards from
posteromedial side of lower end of the ulna. Posteriorly,
between the head and the styloid process, there
is a groove for the tendon of the extensor carpi ulnaris
(Fig. 2.21b).
Attachments
1 The triceps brachii is inserted into the rough posterior
part of the superior surface of the olecranon process
(Fig. 2.23). The anterior part of the surface is covered
by a bursa.
2 The brachialis is inserted into the anterior surface
of the coronoid process including the ulnar
tuberosity (Fig. 2.22).
3 The supinator arises from the supinator crest and
from the triangular area in front of the crest (Fig. 2.22).
4 The ulnar head of the flexor digitorum superficialis
arises from a tubercle at the upper end of the medial
margin of the coronoid process.
5 The ulnar head of the pronator teres arises from the
medial margin of the coronoid process.
6 The flexor digitorum profundus (Latin deep) arises from:
a. The upper three-fourths of the anterior and
medial surfaces of the shaft.
b. The medial surfaces of the coronoid and
olecranon processes.
c. The posterior border of the shaft through
an aponeurosis which also gives origin to the
flexor carpi ulnaris and the extensor carpi ulnaris
(Fig. 2.23).
7 The pronator quadratus takes origin from the
oblique ridge on the lower part of the anterior
surface (Fig. 2.22).
8 The flexor carpi ulnaris (ulnar head) arises from the
medial side of the olecranon process and from the
posterior border.
9 The extensor carpi ulnaris arises from the posterior
border (Fig. 2.23).
10 The anconeus is inserted into the lateral aspect of
the olecranon process and the upper one-fourth of
the posterior surface (Fig. 2.23) of the shaft.
11 The lateral part of the posterior surface gives origin
from above downwards to the abductor pollicis
longus, the extensor pollicis longus and the extensor
indicis.
12 The interosseous membrane is attached to the
interosseous border.
13 The oblique cord is attached to the ulnar tuberosity.
14 The capsular ligament of the elbow joint is attached
to the margins of the trochlear notch, i.e. to the
coronoid and olecranon processes (Fig. 2.22).
--- Page 47 ---
UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
its shaft at a later period than its corresponding other
ends.
The direction of the nutrient foramen in these bones,
as a rule, is opposite to the growing end.
The time of appearance and time of fusion (either of
various parts at one end, or with the shaft) are given in
Table 2.1.
Importance of Capsular
Attachments and Epiphyseal Lines
Metaphysis is the epiphyseal end of the diaphysis. It is
an actively growing part of the bone with rich blood
supply. Infections in this part of the bone are most
common in the young age. The epiphyseal line is the
line of union of metaphysis with the epiphysis. At the
end of the bone, besides the epiphyseal line, is the
attachment of the capsule of the respective joints.
So, infection in the joint may affect the metaphysis
of the bone, if it is partly or completely inside the joint
capsule. As a corollary, the disease of the metaphysis,
if inside a joint, may affect the joint. So, it is worthwhile
to know the intimate relation of the capsular attachment
and the epiphyseal line at the ends of humeral, radial
and ulnar bones as shown in Table 2.2.
OSSIFICATION OF HUMERUS, RADIUS AND ULNA
Law of Ossification
In long bones possessing epiphyses at both their ends,
the epiphysis of that end which appears first is last to
join with the shaft. As a corollary, epiphysis which
appears last is first to join.
These ends of long bones which unite last with the
shaft are designated as growing end of the bone. In case
of long bones of the upper limb, growing ends are at
shoulder and wrist joints. This implies that the upper
end of humerus and lower ends of both radius and ulna
are growing ends; and each will, therefore, unite with
Table 2.1: Ossification of humerus, radius and ulna
Name of bone and parts
Primary centre
Secondary centres
Time of fusion together
Time of fusion
with shaft
Humerus
Shaft
8 wk IUL
Upper end:
(intrauterine life)
Head
1st yr
Greater tubercle
2nd yr
6th yr
20th yr
Lesser tubercle
5th yr
compound epiphysis
Lower end:
Capitulum + lateral
part of trochlea
1st yr
Medial part of trochlea
9th yr
14th yr
16th yr
Lateral epicondyle
12th yr
compound
Medial epicondyle
5th yr
epiphysis
20th yr
Radius
Shaft
8 wk IUL
Lower end
1st yr
20th yr
Upper end
4th year
18th yr
Ulna
Shaft
8 wk IUL
Lower end
5th yr
18th yr
Upper end
10th yr
16th yr
Fig. 2.27: Madelung’s deformity
--- Page 48 ---
BONES
Upper Limb
Section 1
iii. The capitate (Latin head), and
iv. The hamate (Latin hook).
Identification
1 The scaphoid is boat-shaped and has a tubercle on its
lateral side.
2 The lunate is half-moon-shaped or crescentic.
3 The triquetral is pyramidal in shape and has an
isolated oval facet on the distal part of the palmar
surface.
4 The pisiform is pea-shaped and has only one oval facet
on the proximal part of its dorsal surface.
5 The trapezium is quadrangular in shape, and has a
crest and a groove anteriorly. It has a sellar (conca-
voconvex) articular surface distally.
6 The trapezoid resembles the shoe of a baby.
7 The capitate is the largest carpal bone, with a rounded
head.
8 The hamate is wedge-shaped with a hook near its base.
Side Determination
General Points
1 The proximal row is convex proximally, and concave
distally.
2 The distal row is convex proximally and flat distally.
Table 2.2: Relation of capsular attachments and epiphyseal lines
Name of bone and part Capsular attachment (CA)
Epiphyseal line (EL)
Metaphysis
Humerus, upper end
Laterally to the anatomical neck,
At the lowest part of articular
Metaphysis is partly
medially 2 cm below the shaft
surface of the head
intracapsular
and deficient at bicipital groove
Humerus, lower end
Follows the margins of radial
A horizontal line at the level of
Metaphysis is partly
and coronoid fossae and the
lateral epicondyle. Medial
intracapsular
olecranon fossa
epicondyle owns a separate
Both epicondyles are extracapsular
epiphyseal line
Radius, upper end
Attached to the neck of the radius
The head forms the epiphysis
Metaphysis is
intracapsular
Radius, lower end
Close to the articular margin all
Horizontal line at the level of
Metaphysis is completely
around
the upper part of ulnar notch
extracapsular
Ulna, upper end
Near the articular surface of ulna
Scale-like epiphysis on the
Metaphysis and part of
upper surface of olecranon
diaphysis are related to
process
capsular line. The epi-
physis is extracapsular
Ulna, lower end
Around the head of ulna
Horizontal line at the level of
Metaphysis is partly
articulating surface of radius
intracapsular
CLINICAL ANATOMY
Relation of capsular attachments and epiphyseal
lines: If epiphyseal line, i.e. site of union of epiphysis
and metaphyseal end of diaphysis is intracapsular,
the infections of the joints are likely to affect the
metaphysis, the actively growing part of the bone
especially in young age.
Competency achievement: The student should be able to:
AN 8.5 Identify and name various bones in articulated hand, specify
the parts of metacarpals and phalanges and enumerate the
peculiarities of pisiform.6
CARPAL BONES
The carpus is (Greek Karpos, wrist) made up of 8 carpal
bones, which are arranged in two rows (Fig. 2.28).
1 The proximal row contains (from lateral to medial side):
i. The scaphoid (Greek boat, wrist),
ii. The lunate (Latin moon-shaped),
iii. The triquetral (Latin three-cornered), and
iv. The pisiform (Greek pea)
2 The distal row contains in the same order:
i. The trapezium (Greek four-sided geometric figure),
ii. The trapezoid (Greek baby’s shoe),
--- Page 49 ---
UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
3 Each bone has 6 surfaces.
i. The palmar and dorsal surfaces are non-articular,
except for the triquetral and pisiform.
ii. The lateral surfaces of the two lateral bones
(scaphoid and trapezium) are non-articular.
iii. The medial surfaces of the three medial bones
(triquetral, pisiform and hamate) are non-
articular.
4 The dorsal non-articular surface is always larger
than the palmar non-articular surface, except for the
lunate, in which the palmar surface is larger than
the dorsal.
The general points help in identifying the proximal,
distal, palmar and dorsal surfaces in most of the bones.
The side can be finally determined with the help of the
specific points.
Specific Points
1 The scaphoid: The tubercle is directed laterally,
forward and downwards.
2 The lunate:
i. A small semilunar articular surface for the
scaphoid is on the lateral side.
ii. A quadrilateral articular surface for the triquetral
is on the medial side.
3 The triquetral:
i. The oval facet for the pisiform lies on the distal
part of the palmar surface.
ii. The medial and dorsal surfaces are continuous
and non-articular.
4 The pisiform:
i. The oval facet for the triquetral lies on the
proximal part of the dorsal surface.
ii. The lateral surface is grooved by the ulnar nerve.
5 The trapezium:
i. The palmar surface has a vertical groove for the
tendon of the flexor carpi radialis.
ii. The groove is limited laterally by the crest of the
trapezium.
iii. The distal surface bears a sellar concavoconvex
articular surface for the base of the first metacarpal
bone.
Fig. 2.28: Skeleton of the right hand: Palmar aspect
--- Page 50 ---
BONES
Upper Limb
Section 1
6 The trapezoid:
i. The distal articular surface is bigger than the
proximal.
ii. The palmar non-articular surface is prolonged
laterally.
7 The capitate: The dorsomedial angle is the distal-most
projection from the body of the capitate. It bears a
small facet for the 4th metacarpal bone.
8 The hamate: The hook projects from the distal part of
the palmar surface, and is directed laterally.
Attachments
There are four bony pillars at the four corners of the
carpus. All attachments are to these four pillars (Fig. 2.28).
1 The tubercle of the scaphoid:
i. The flexor retinaculum,
ii. A few fibres of the abductor pollicis brevis.
2 The pisiform gives:
i. Insertion to be Flexor carpi ulnaris (FCU).
Pisiform is a sesamoid bone in tendon of FCU.
ii. Flexor retinaculum and its superficial slip (see
Fig. 9.15),
iii. Abductor digiti minimi (Fig. 2.32b),
iv. Extensor retinaculum (see Fig. 9.52).
3 The trapezium:
i. The crest gives origin to the abductor pollicis
brevis, flexor pollicis brevis, and opponens
pollicis. These constitute muscles of thenar
eminence (Fig. 2.32b).
ii. The edges of the groove give attachment to the
two layers of the flexor retinaculum.
iii. The lateral surface gives attachment to the lateral
ligament of the wrist joint.
iv. The groove lodges the tendon of the flexor carpi
radialis.
4 The hamate:
i. The tip of the hook gives attachment to the flexor
retinaculum (see Fig. 9.15).
ii. The medial side of the hook gives attachment to the
flexor digiti minimi and the opponens digiti minimi.
Articulations
1 The scaphoid: Radius, lunate, trapezium, trapezoid
capitate (Figs 2.32b and c).
2 The lunate: Radius, scaphoid, capitate, hamate and
triquetral.
3 The triquetral: Pisiform, lunate, hamate and articular
disc of the inferior radioulnar joint.
4 The pisiform articulates only with the triquetral.
5 The trapezium: Scaphoid, 1st and 2nd metacarpals
and trapezoid.
OSSIFICATION
The year of appearance of centre of ossification in
the carpal bones is shown in Fig. 2.29.
CLINICAL ANATOMY
• Fracture of the scaphoid is quite common. The
bone fractures through the waist at right angles
to its long axis. The fracture is caused by a fall
on the outstretched hand, or on the tips of the
fingers. This causes tenderness and swelling
in the anatomical snuffbox, and pain on
longitudinal percussion of the thumb and index
finger. The residual disability is more marked
in the midcarpal joint than in the wrist joint. The
importance of the fracture lies in its liability to
non-union, and avascular necrosis of the body
of the bone with pain in anatomical snuffbox.
Normally, the scaphoid has two nutrient
arteries, one entering the palmar surface of the
tubercle and the other the dorsal surface of the
body. Occasionally (13% of cases), both vessels
enter through the tubercle or through the distal
half of the bone. In such cases, fracture may
deprive the proximal half of the bone of its blood
supply leading to avascular necrosis (Fig. 2.30).
• It may be treated on the lines of osteoarthritis.
• Dislocation of the lunate may be produced by a
fall on the acutely dorsiflexed hand with the elbow
joint flexed. This displaces the lunate anteriorly,
also leading to carpal tunnel syndrome like features
(Figs 2.31a to c).
METACARPAL BONES
1 The metacarpal bones are 5 miniature long bones,
which are numbered from lateral to the medial side
(Fig. 2.28).
2 Each bone has a head placed distally, a shaft and a
base at the proximal end.
i. The head is round. It has an articular surface which
extends more anteroposteriorly than laterally. It
Competency achievement: The student should be able to:
AN 8.6 Describe scaphoid fracture and explain the anatomical basis
of avascular necrosis.7
6 The trapezoid: Scaphoid, trapezium, 2nd metacarpal
and capitate.
7 The capitate: Scaphoid, lunate, hamate, 2nd, 3rd and
4th metacarpals and trapezoid.
8 The hamate: Lunate, triquetral, capitate, and 4th and
5th metacarpals.
--- Page 51 ---
UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
Figs 2.31a to c: (a) Normal position of nerves, (b) Dislocation
of lunate leading to carpal tunnel syndrome, and (c) Ape-like
deformity of the hand (flattened thenar eminence)
Fig. 2.30: Fracture of the scaphoid
Fig. 2.29: Ossification of lower ends of radius, ulna, carpal bones, metacarpals and phalanges
--- Page 52 ---
BONES
Upper Limb
Section 1
extends more on the palmar surface than on the
dorsal surface. The heads of the metacarpal bones
form the knuckles during flexion.
ii. The shaft is concave on the palmar surface. Its
dorsal surface bears a flat triangular area in its
distal part.
iii. The base is irregularly expanded (Fig. 2.32a).
3 A metacarpal bone can be distinguished from a
metatarsal bone because of the differences given in
Table 2.3.
Characteristics of Individual Metacarpal Bones
1st a. It is the shortest and stoutest of all metacarpal
bones (Fig. 2.32b).
b. The base is occupied by a concavoconvex
articular surface for the trapezium.
c. The dorsal surface of the shaft is uniformly
convex (Fig. 2.32c).
d. The head is less convex and broader from side-
to-side than the heads of other metacarpals. The
ulnar and radial corners of the palmar surface
show impressions for sesamoid bones.
e. The first metacarpal bone (lying on a more
anterior plane) is rotated medially through 90°
relative to the other metacarpals. As a result of
this rotation, the movements of the thumb take
place at right angles to those of other digits.
It does not articulate with any other metacarpal
bone.
2nd The base is grooved from before backwards. The
medial edge of the groove is larger (Fig. 2.32a).
3rd The base has a styloid process projecting up from
the dorsolateral corner (Fig. 2.32a).
4th The base has two small oval facets on its lateral side
for the third metacarpal, and on its medial side it
has a single elongated facet for the 5th metacarpal
(Fig. 2.32a).
5th The base has an elongated articular strip on its
lateral side for the 4th metacarpal. The medial side
of the base is non-articular and bears a tubercle.
Side Determination of Metacarpals
The proximal, distal, palmar and dorsal aspects of each
metacarpal bone can be made out from what has been
stated above. The lateral and medial sides can be
confirmed by the following criteria.
1st The anterolateral surface is larger than the
anteromedial (Fig. 2.32b).
i. The medial edge of the groove on the base is
deeper than the lateral edge.
ii. The medial side of the base bears an articular
strip which is constricted in the middle.
i. The styloid process is dorsolateral.
ii. The lateral side of the base bears an articular
strip which is constricted in the middle.
iii. The medial side of the base has two small oval
facets for the 4th metacarpal.
i. The lateral side of the base has two small oval
facets for the 3rd metacarpal.
ii. The medial side of the base has an elongated
articular strip for the 5th metacarpal.
i. The lateral side of the base has an elongated
articular strip for the 4th metacarpal.
ii. The medial side of the base is non-articular and
has a tubercle.
Table 2.3: Differences between metacarpals and meta-
tarsals
Metacarpal
Metatarsal
1. The head and shaft are
1. The head and shaft are
prismoid
flattened from side-to-side
2. The shaft is of uniform
2. The shaft tapers distally
thickness
3. The dorsal surface of
3. The dorsal surface of
the shaft has an elongated,
the shaft is uniformly
flat triangular area
convex
4. The base is irregular
4. The base appears to be
cut sharply and obliquely
Fig. 2.32a: Bases of I–V metacarpal bones
--- Page 54 ---
BONES
Upper Limb
Section 1
Main Attachments of Metacarpals
The main attachments from shaft of metacarpals are of
palmar and dorsal interossei muscles. Palmar interossei
arise from one bone each except the 3rd metacarpal
(Fig. 2.32b). Dorsal interossei arise from adjacent sides
of two metacarpals (Fig. 2.32c). The other attachments
are listed below.
1st a. The opponens pollicis is inserted on the radial
border and the anterolateral surface of the shaft
(Fig. 2.32b).
b. The abductor pollicis longus is inserted on the
lateral side of the base.
c. The first palmar interosseous muscle arises
from the ulnar side of the base.
2nd a. The flexor carpi radialis is inserted on a tubercle
on the palmar surface of the base (Fig. 2.32b).
b. The extensor carpi radialis longus is inserted
on the dorsal surface of the base (Fig. 2.32c).
c. The oblique head of the adductor pollicis arises
from the palmar surface of the base.
3rd a. A slip from the flexor carpi radialis is inserted
on the palmar surface of the base.
b. The extensor carpi radialis brevis is inserted on
the dorsal surface of the base, immediately
beyond the styloid process.
c. The oblique head of the adductor pollicis arises
from the palmar surface of the base (Fig. 2.32b).
d. The transverse head of the adductor pollicis
arises from the distal two-thirds of the palmar
surface of the shaft (Fig. 2.32b)
4th Only the interossei arise from it (Figs 2.32b and c).
5th a. The extensor carpi ulnaris is inserted on the
tubercle at the base.
b. The opponens digiti minimi is inserted on the
medial surface of the shaft (Fig. 2.32b).
Articulations at the Bases
With the trapezium forms saddle-shaped joint.
2nd :
With the trapezium, the trapezoid, the capitate
and the 3rd metacarpal (Fig. 2.32b and c).
3rd :
With the capitate and the 2nd and 4th
metacarpals.
With the capitate, the hamate and the 3rd and
5th metacarpals.
With the hamate and the 4th metacarpal.
OSSIFICATION
• The shafts ossify from one primary centre each,
which appears during the 9th week of development.
• A secondary centre for the head appears in the
2nd–5th metacarpals, and for the base in the
1st metacarpal. It appears during the 2nd–3rd year
and fuses with the shaft at about 16–18 years
(Fig. 2.29).
CLINICAL ANATOMY
• Fracture of the base of the first metacarpal is called
Bennett’s fracture. It involves the anterior part of
the base, and is caused by a force along its long
axis. The thumb is forced into a semiflexed
position and cannot be opposed. The fist cannot
be clenched (Fig. 2.33).
• The other metacarpals may also be fractured by
direct or indirect violence. Direct violence usually
displaces the fractured segment forwards. Indirect
violence displaces them backwards (Fig. 2.34).
Fig. 2.33: Bennett’s fracture
Fig. 2.34: Fracture through the neck of metacarpal (usually
angulated)
--- Page 55 ---
UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
Head
In the proximal and middle phalanges, the head has a
pulley-shaped articular surface. In the distal phalanges,
the head is non-articular, and is marked anteriorly by
a rough horseshoe-shaped tuberosity which supports
the sensitive pulp of the finger/tip.
Attachments
1 Base of the distal phalanx
a. The flexor digitorum profundus is inserted on the
palmar surface (Fig. 2.32b).
b. Two-side slips of digital expansion fuse to be inserted
on the dorsal surface. These also extend the
insertion of lumbrical and interossei muscles
(Fig. 2.32c).
2 The middle phalanx
a. The two slips of flexor digitorum superficialis are
inserted on each side of the shaft (Fig. 2.32b).
b. The fibrous flexor sheath is also attached to the
side of the shaft.
c. A major part of the extensor digitorum is inserted
on the dorsal surface of the base through dorsal
digital expansion (Fig. 2.32c).
3 The proximal phalanx
a. The fibrous flexor sheath is attached to the sides
of the shaft.
b. On each side of the base, parts of the lumbricals
and interossei are inserted.
4 In the thumb, the base of the proximal phalanx
provides attachments to the following structures
(Fig. 2.32b).
a. The abductor pollicis brevis and flexor pollicis
brevis are inserted on the lateral side.
b. The adductor pollicis and the first palmar
interosseous are inserted on the medial side.
c. The extensor pollicis brevis is inserted on the
dorsal surface (Fig. 2.32c).
5 In the little finger, the medial side of the base of the
proximal phalanx provides insertion to the abductor
digiti minimi and the flexor digiti minimi (Fig. 2.32b).
OSSIFICATION
• The shaft of each phalanx ossifies from a primary
centre which appears during the 8th week of
development in the distal phalanx, 10th week in the
proximal phalanx and 12th week in the middle
phalanx.
• The secondary centre appears for the base during
2–4 years and fuses with the shaft during 15–18
years (Fig. 2.29).
PHALANGES
There are 14 phalanges in each hand, three for each
finger and two for the thumb. Each phalanx has a base,
a shaft and a head.
Base
In the proximal phalanx, the base is marked by a
concave oval facet for articulation with the head of the
metacarpal bone. In the middle phalanx, or a distal
phalanx, it is marked by two small concave facets
separated by a smooth ridge.
Shaft
The shaft tapers towards the head. The dorsal surface is
convex from side-to-side. The palmar surface is flattened
from side-to-side, but is gently concave in its long axis.
• Tubercular or syphilitic disease of the metacarpals
or phalanges in a child is located in the middle of
the diaphysis rather than in the metaphysis because
the nutrient artery breaks up into a plexus
immediately upon reaching the medullary cavity.
In adults, however, the chances of infection
are minimised because the nutrient artery is replaced
(as the major source of supply) by periosteal vessels.
• When the thumb possesses three phalanges, the
first metacarpal has two epiphyses one at each
end. Occasionally, the first metacarpal bifurcates
distally. Then the medial branch has no distal
epiphysis, and has only two phalanges. The lateral
branch has a distal epiphysis and three phalanges
(Fig. 2.35). Total digits are six in such case
(polydactyly).
Fig. 2.35: Six digits (polydactyly)
--- Page 56 ---
BONES
Upper Limb
Section 1
FACTS TO REMEMBER
• Axillary, radial and ulnar nerves are intimately
related to humerus and are liable to be injured.
• Radial pulse is felt close to the lower end of shaft
of radius.
• Pisiform bone is a sesamoid bone in the tendon of
flexor carpi ulnaris muscle.
• First metacarpal is the shortest, and strongest of
metacarpals. It is situated at an angle to the other
bones, thus permitting opposition of the thumb.
• Third metacarpal is the longest and the axis of
abduction and adduction passes through its centre.
CLINICAL ANATOMY
Fracture of distal phalanx of middle finger is
commonest. It is treated by splinting the injured
phalanx to the adjacent normal finger. This is called
‘buddy splint’. Figure 2.36 shows buddy splint of
the fingers.
SESAMOID BONES
Sesamoid bones (Latin sesum, seed-like) are small
rounded masses of bones located in some tendons at
points where they are subjected to great pressure. They
are variable in their occurrence. These are as follows.
1 The pisiform is often regarded as a sesamoid bone
lying within the tendon of the flexor carpi ulnaris.
2 Two sesamoid bones are always found on the palmar
surface of the head of the first metacarpal bone.
3 One sesamoid bone is found in the capsule of the
interphalangeal joint of the thumb, in 75% of subjects.
4 One sesamoid bone is found on the ulnar side of the
capsule of the metacarpophalangeal joint of the little
finger, in about 75% of subjects.
5 Less frequently, there is a sesamoid bone on the
lateral side of the metacarpophalangeal joint of the
index finger.
6 Sometimes sesamoid bone may be found at other
metacarpophalangeal joints.
Mnemonics
Carpal bones
“She Looks Too Pretty, Try To Catch Her”
Lateral to medial, proximal row
Fig. 2.36: Buddy splint of the fingers
Scaphoid
Lunate
Triquetral
Pisiform
Distal row
Trapezium
Trapezoid
Capitate
Hamate
Elbow
Which side has common flexor origin
FM (as in FM Radio)
Flexor medial, so common flexor origin is on the medial side.
Bicipital groove of humerus “Lady between 2 majors”
Lateral lip—pectoralis major
Medial lip—teres major
Floor—latissimus dorsi
Arm Fracture: nerves affected by humerus fracture
ARM fracture:
From superior to inferior:
Axillary—neck of humerus
Radial—mid-shaft
Ulnar—behind medial epicondyle
CLINICOANATOMICAL PROBLEM
A 50-year-old man fell off his bicycle. He heard a
cracking noise and felt severe pain in his right
shoulder region. He noted that the lateral part of the
shoulder drooped and medial end of clavicle was
elevated.
• Which is the common site of fracture of clavicle
and why?
• Why did his shoulder droop down?
Ans: The clavicle gets fractured at the junction of
medial two-thirds and lateral one-third. This is the
weak point as it lies at the junction of two opposing
curvatures.
The shoulder drooped down, because of the
weight of the unsupported shoulder.
--- Page 57 ---
UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
c. Shaft of humerus
d. Radial tuberosity
4. All the following muscles are flexors of the wrist, except:
a. Flexor carpi
b. Flexor digitorum
radialis
superficialis
c. Pronator teres
d. Flexor carpi ulnaris
5. The axis of abduction/adduction of digits passes
through centre of which digit?
a. 2nd
b. 3rd
c. 4th
d. 5th
6. All are heads of triceps brachii, except:
a. Long head
b. Short head
c. Lateral head
d. Medial head
1. Name the muscles attached to greater and lesser
tubercles of humerus.
2. Name the muscles attached to medial border of
scapula on the dorsal and costal surfaces.
3. Name the tendons present on the posterior surface
of lower end of radius.
4. Name the muscles arising from the aponeurosis
attached to the posterior border of ulna.
5. Name the attachment of deltoid and trapezius on
the clavicle.
6. Name the attachment of flexor digitorum
superficialis and flexor digitorum profundus
muscles on the phalanges.
1. Which of the following bones is the first one to start
ossification?
a. Ulna
b. Scapula
c. Clavicle
d. Humerus
2. Fracture of humerus at midshaft is likely to cause
injury to which of the following nerves?
a. Median
b. Radial
c. Ulnar
d. Musculocutaneous
3. Attachments of biceps brachii are to all of the
following, except:
a. Tip of coracoid process
b. Supraglenoid tubercle
1. c
2. b
3. c
4. c
5. b
6. b
CLAVICLE
• Enumerate the peculiarities of the clavicle.
• What type of joint is sternoclavicular joint?
• What fascia is attached to the margins of subclavian
groove?
• Which is the common site of fracture of clavicle and
why?
• What is cleidocranial dysostosis?
SCAPULA
• What type of muscle is subscapularis?
FURTHER READING
• Boileau P, Walch G. The three-dimensional geometry of the
proximal humerus. Implication for surgical technique and
prosthetic design. J Bone Joint Surg br 1997;79:857–65.
The seminal European publication that introduced the science of
measurement to the understanding of the morphology of the proximal
humerus, and from which all subsequent work takes its lead.
• Oehmke MJ, Podranski T, Klaus R, et al. The blood supply
of the scaphoid bone. J Hand Surg 2009;34E:351–57.
An anatomical study of 12 cadaver hands which demonstrates a
variety of vascular anastomoses around the scaphoid. It notes that
a dorsal approach to the scaphoid bone is possible as there is an
available blood supply from the palmar circulation.
1–7 From Medical Council of India, Competency based Undergraduate Curriculum for the Indian Medical Graduate, 2018;1:44–80.
--- Page 58 ---
BONES
Upper Limb
Section 1
• Name the muscle attached to medial border of costal
surface of scapula.
• Name the muscles attached to coracoid process of
scapula.
• Enumerate the arteries related to all three borders of
scapula.
• What nerve lies deep to transverse ligament/
suprascapular ligament? Name the muscles supplied
by this nerve.
• What is ‘winging’ of the scapula?
HUMERUS
• Name the muscles attached to greater tubercle of
humerus. Which nerves innervate these muscles?
• What muscle is attached to lateral lip of bicipital
groove of humerus? Show its actions.
• Mark the attachments of two heads of biceps brachii
muscle. Show its actions.
• Show the position of important nerves related to the
humerus.
• Name the muscles attached to lateral supracondylar
ridge of humerus.
• What muscle arises from the front of lower part of
humerus? Name the nerves supplying this muscle.
• What leads to Volkmann’s ischaemic contracture?
RADIUS
• Where is the insertion of biceps brachii muscle. Show
its actions?
• What muscle arises from anterior surface of radius?
What type of muscle is it according to arrangement
of its muscle fibres?
• Where is radial pulse felt in relation to radius?
• Name the tendons on the dorsal surface of radius.
• Which border of radius gives attachment to
interosseous membrane? Name the functions of this
membrane.
• Name the carpal bones which articulate with distal
end of radius.
• What is Colles’ fracture?
• What causes the ‘pulled elbow’?
ULNA
• How many joints are formed between radius and
ulna? What are the types of these joints?
• Which muscle is attached to maximum area of ulna?
What type of muscle is it according to its nerve
supply?
• Mark the attachment of anconeus muscle. What is
its action?
• What tendon passes through the gap between head
and styloid process of ulna?
• How does Madelung’s deformity occur?
CARPUS
• Name the carpal bones in order.
• What type of bone is pisiform? Name other bones of
the same type.
• Name the tendon traversing through the groove on
trapezium. Where is its insertion?
• Name the attachments of the flexor retinaculum.
• Name the structures passing deep to the flexor
retinaculum.
• What is carpal tunnel syndrome?
• Where is the pain of scaphoid fracture felt?
• What leads to avascular necrosis of the scaphoid?
METACARPUS
• Name the peculiarities of 1st metacarpal bone.
• Where are the sesamoid bones placed in relation to
the metacarpal bone?
• Which metacarpal does not give attachment to
palmar interosseous? Which is smallest palmar
interosseous?
• Where is the attachment of opponens pollcis muscle?
What is its action?
• Which muscle is attached to the palmar surface of
shaft of 3rd metacarpal?
• How does one distinguish the metacarpals from the
metatarsals?
• What is ‘Bennett’s fracture’?
• What is polydactyly?
• What is the importance of 3rd metacarpal?
PHALANGES
• Which muscle is inserted into the palmar surface of
base of distal phalanx?
• Slips of which expansion are attached into the dorsal
surface of base of distal phalanx?
• Slips of which muscle are attached on each side of
the shaft of middle phalanx?
• Slip of which muscle is attached do the dorsal surface
of base of middle phalanx?
• Name the muscles attached on each side of the base
of proximal phalanx.
• What is buddy splint?
--- Page 59 ---
UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
INTRODUCTION
The pectoral region lies on the front of the chest. It
essentially consists of structures which connect the
upper limb to the anterolateral chest wall. Breast lies
in this region.
Competency achievement: The student should be able to:
AN 13.6 Identify and demonstrate important bony landmarks of
upper limb: Jugular notch, sternal angle, acromial angle, spine of
the scapula, vertebral level of the medial end, inferior angle of the
scapula.1
SURFACE LANDMARKS
The following features of the pectoral region can be seen
or felt on the surface of body.
1 The clavicle lies horizontally at the root of the neck,
separating it from the front of the chest. The bone is
subcutaneous, and therefore, palpable throughout its
length. Medially, it articulates with the sternum at the
sternoclavicular joint, and laterally with the acromion
process at the acromioclavicular joint. Both the joints
are palpable because of the upward projecting ends
of the clavicle (Fig. 3.1). The sternoclavicular joint may
be masked by the sternocleidomastoid muscle.
2 The jugular notch (interclavicular or suprasternal
notch) lies between the medial ends of the clavicles,
at the superior border of the manubrium sterni.
3 The sternal angle (angle of Louis) is felt as a
transverse ridge about 5 cm below the jugular notch
(Fig. 3.1). It marks the manubriosternal joint.
Laterally, on either side, the second costal cartilage
joins the sternum at this level. The sternal angle thus
serves as a landmark for identification of the second
rib. Other ribs can be identified by counting
downwards from the second rib.
Pectoral Region
Who ever thought of the word “Mammogram?”. Every time I hear it, I think‘
I’m supposed to put my breast in an envelope and send it to someone’ 
—Jan Kingz
4 The epigastric fossa (pit of the stomach) is the
depression in the infrasternal angle. The fossa
overlies the xiphoid process, and is bounded on each
side by the seventh costal cartilage.
5 The nipple is markedly variable in position in
females. In males, and in immature females, it
usually lies in the fourth intercostal space just
medial to the midclavicular line; or 10 cm from the
midsternal line. In fact, the position of the nipple is
variable even in males.
6 The midclavicular line passes vertically through the
middle of clavicle, the tip of the ninth costal cartilage
and the midinguinal point.
Fig. 3.1: Surface landmarks: Shoulder, axilla, arm and elbow
regions (anterior aspect)
--- Page 60 ---
PECTORAL REGION
Upper Limb
Section 1
7 The infraclavicular fossa (deltopectoral triangle) is a
triangular depression below the junction of the
lateral and middle thirds of the clavicle. It is
bounded medially by the pectoralis major, laterally
by the anterior fibres of the deltoid, and superiorly
by the clavicle.
8 The tip of the coracoid process of the scapula lies
2–3 cm below the clavicle, overlapped by the
anterior fibres of the deltoid. It can be felt on deep
palpation just lateral to the infraclavicular fossa.
9 The acromion process of the scapula (acron = summit;
omos = shoulder) is a flattened piece of bone that
lies subcutaneously forming the top of the shoulder.
The posterior end of its lateral border is called the
acromial angle, where it is continuous with the lower
lip of the crest of the spine of the scapula. The
anterior end of its medial border articulates with
the clavicle at the acromioclavicular joint.
10 The deltoid is triangular muscle with its apex directed
downwards. It forms the rounded contour of the
shoulder, extending vertically from the acromion
process to the deltoid tuberosity of the humerus.
11 The axilla (Latin armpit) is a pyramidal space
between the arm and chest. When the arm is raised
(abducted), the floor of the axilla rises, the anterior
and posterior folds stand out, and the space becomes
more prominent. The anterior axillary fold contains
the lower border of the pectoralis major, and posterior
axillary fold contains the tendon of the latissimus dorsi
winding round the fleshy teres major.
The medial wall of the axilla is formed by the upper
4 ribs covered by the serratus anterior. The narrow
lateral wall presents the upper part of the humerus
covered by the short head of the biceps, and the
coracobrachialis. Axillary arterial pulsations can be
felt by pressing the artery against the humerus. The
cords of the brachial plexus can also be rolled against
the humerus. The head of the humerus can be felt
by pressing the fingers upwards into the axilla.
12 The midaxillary line is a vertical line drawn midway
between the anterior and posterior axillary folds.
DISSECTION
Mark the following points.
i. Centre of the suprasternal notch
ii. Xiphoid process
iii. 7 o’clock position at the margin of areola (left
side), and 5 o’clock position at the margin of
areola (right side)
iv. Lateral end of clavicle (Fig. 3.2).
Give an incision vertically down from the first point
to the second which joins the centre of the suprasternal
notch to the xiphoid process in the midsagittal plane.
From the lower end of this line, extend the incision
upward and laterally till you reach to the third point on
the areolar margin.
Encircle the areola and carry the incision upwards
and laterally till the anterior axillary fold is reached.
Continue the line of incision downwards along the
medial border of the upper arm till its junction of upper
one-third and lower two-thirds. Extend this incision
transversely across the arm (refer to BDC App).
Make another incision horizontally from the xiphoid
process across the chest wall till the posterior axillary fold.
Lastly, give horizontal incision from the centre of supra-
sternal notch to the lateral (acromial) end of the clavicle.
Reflect the two flaps of skin towards the upper limb.
SUPERFICIAL FASCIA
The superficial fascia (Latin a band) of the pectoral
region is visualised after the skin has been incised. It
contains moderate amount of fat, and is continuous
with that of surrounding regions. The breast, which is
well developed in females, is the most important of all
contents of this fascia. The fibrous septa given off by
the fascia support the lobes of the gland, and the skin
covering the gland.
Contents
In addition to fat, the superficial fascia of the pectoral
region contains the following.
i. Cutaneous nerves derived from the cervical plexus
and from the intercostal nerves.
Fig. 3.2: Points and lines of incision
--- Page 61 ---
UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
ii. Cutaneous branches from the internal thoracic and
posterior intercostal arteries.
iii. The platysma (Greek broad).
iv. The breast.
Cutaneous Nerves of the Pectoral Region
The cutaneous nerves of the pectoral (Latin pectus,
chest) region are as follows (Figs 3.3 and 3.4).
1 The medial, intermediate and lateral supraclavicular
nerves are branches of the cervical plexus (C3, C4).
They supply the skin over the upper half of the
deltoid and from the clavicle down to the second rib.
2 The anterior and lateral cutaneous branches of the
second to sixth intercostal nerves supply the skin
below the level of the second rib. The inter-
costobrachial nerve of T2 supplies the skin of the
floor of the axilla and the upper half of the medial
side of the arm (Fig. 3.3).
It is of interest to note that the area supplied by spinal
nerves C3 and C4 directly meets the area supplied by
spinal nerves T2 and T3. This is because of the fact that
the intervening nerves (C5–C8 and T1) have been
‘pulled away’ to supply the upper limb. It may also be
noted that normally the areas supplied by adjoining
spinal nerves overlap, but because of what has been said
above there is hardly any overlap between the areas
supplied by C3 and C4 above and T2 and T3 below
(Fig. 3.4).
Cutaneous Vessels
The cutaneous vessels are very small. The anterior
cutaneous nerves are accompanied by the perforating
branches of the internal thoracic artery. The second, third
and fourth of these branches are large in females for
supplying the breast. The lateral cutaneous nerves are
accompanied by the lateral cutaneous branches of the
posterior intercostal arteries (Fig. 3.8).
Platysma
The platysma (Greek broad) is a thin, broad sheet of
subcutaneous muscle. The fibres of the muscle arise
from the deep fascia covering the pectoralis major; run
upwards and medially, crossing the clavicle and the
side of the neck; and are inserted into the base of the
mandible, and into skin over the posterior and lower
part of the face. The platysma is supplied by a branch
of the facial nerve. When the angle of the mouth is pulled
down, the muscle contracts and wrinkles the skin of
the neck. The platysma may protect the external jugular
vein (which underlies the muscle) from external
pressure.
Competency achievement: The student should be able to:
AN 9.2 Describe the location, extent, deep relations, structure, age
changes, blood supply, lymphatic drainage, microanatomy and
applied anatomy of breast.2
BREAST
The breast is the most important structure present in
the pectoral region.
Fig. 3.3: Cutaneous nerves of the pectoral region
Fig. 3.4: Areas supplied by cutaneous nerves of the pectoral
region
--- Page 62 ---
PECTORAL REGION
Upper Limb
Section 1
The breast is found in both sexes, but is rudimentary
in the male. It is well developed in the female after
puberty. It forms an important accessory organ of the
female reproductive system, and provides nutrition to
the newborn in the form of milk. Its shape may be
hemispherical, conical, pyriform, pendulous or flat.
Situation
The breast lies in the superficial fascia of the pectoral
region. It is divided into four quadrants, i.e. upper
medial, upper lateral, lower medial and lower lateral.
A small extension of the upper lateral quadrant, called
the axillary tail of Spence, passes through an opening in
the deep fascia and lies in the axilla (Fig. 3.5). The
opening is called foramen of Langer. Its base is circular.
Extent of the Base
i. Vertically, it extends from the second to the sixth
ribs.
ii. Horizontally, it extends from the lateral border of
the sternum to the midaxillary line.
Deep Relations
The deep surface of the breast is related to the following
structures in that order (Fig. 3.6).
1 The breast lies on the deep fascia (pectoral fascia)
covering the pectoralis major.
2 Still deeper there are the parts of three muscles,
namely the pectoralis major, the serratus anterior, and
the external oblique muscle of the abdomen.
3 The breast is separated from the pectoral fascia by
loose areolar tissue, called the retromammary space.
Because of the presence of this loose tissue, the
normal breast can be moved freely over the pectoralis
major.
Structure of the Breast
The structure of the breast may be conveniently studied
by dividing it into the skin, the parenchyma, and the
stroma. The parenchyma is known as the mammary
gland.
Fig. 3.5: Extent of the breast
Figs 3.6a and b: (a) Axillary tail and the four quadrants of breast, and (b) the muscles situated deep to the breast
--- Page 63 ---
UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
Skin
It covers the gland and presents the following features.
1 A conical projection, called the nipple, is present just
below the centre of the breast at the level of the
fourth intercostal space 10 cm from the midline. The
nipple is pierced by 15 to 20 lactiferous ducts. It
contains circular and longitudinal smooth muscle
fibres which can make the nipple stiff or flatten it,
respectively. It has a few modified sweat and
sebaceous glands. It is rich in nerve supply and has
many sensory end organs at the termination of
nerve fibres.
2 The skin surrounding the base of the nipple is
pigmented and forms a circular area called the areola.
This region is rich in modified sebaceous glands,
particularly at its outer margin. These become
enlarged during pregnancy and lactation to form
raised tubercles of Montgomery. Oily secretions of these
glands lubricate the nipple and areola, and prevent
them from cracking during lactation. Apart from
sebaceous glands, the areola also contains some
sweat glands, and accessory mammary glands. The
skin of the areola and nipple is devoid of hair, and
there is no fat subjacent to it. Below the areola lie
lactiferous sinus where stored milk is seen.
Parenchyma (Mammary Gland)
Mammary gland is a compound tubuloalveolar gland
which secretes milk. As it lies in superficial fascia, there
is no capsule. Mammary gland is a modified sweat
gland. The gland consists of 15 to 20 lobes. Each lobe is
a cluster of alveoli, and is drained by a lactiferous duct.
The lactiferous ducts converge towards the nipple and
open on it. Near its termination, each duct has a
dilatation called a lactiferous sinus (Figs 3.7a and b).
Stroma
It forms the supporting framework of the gland. It is
partly fibrous and partly fatty.
The fibrous stroma forms septa, known as the
suspensory ligaments of Cooper, which anchor the skin
and gland to the pectoral fascia (Fig. 3.7a).
The fatty stroma forms the main bulk of the gland. It
is distributed all over the breast, except beneath the
areola and nipple.
Blood Supply
The mammary gland is extremely vascular. It is
supplied by branches of the following arteries (Fig. 3.8).
1 Internal thoracic artery, a branch of the subclavian
artery, through its perforating branches.
2 The lateral thoracic, superior thoracic and acromio-
thoracic (thoracoacromial) branches of the axillary
artery.
3 Lateral branches of the posterior intercostal arteries.
The arteries converge on the breast and are distri-
buted from the anterior surface. The posterior surface
is relatively avascular.
The veins follow the arteries. They first converge
towards the base of the nipple where they form an
anastomotic venous circle, from where veins run in
superficial and deep sets.
1 The superficial veins drain into the internal thoracic
vein and into the superficial veins of the lower part
of the neck.
2 The deep veins drain into the axillary and posterior
intercostal veins.
Nerve Supply
The breast is supplied by the anterior and lateral
cutaneous branches of the 4th to 6th intercostal nerves.
The nerves convey sensory fibres to the skin, and
Figs 3.7a and b: (a) Suspensory ligaments of the breast and its lobes, and (b) structure of one lobe of the mammary gland
--- Page 64 ---
PECTORAL REGION
Upper Limb
Section 1
autonomic fibres to smooth muscle and to blood vessels.
The nerves do not control the secretion of milk.
Secretion is controlled by the hormone prolactin,
secreted by the pars anterior of the hypophysis cerebri.
The diagnosis and management of breast disease
should be done carefully.
Competency achievement: The student should be able to:
AN 10.4 Describe the anatomical groups of axillary lymph nodes
and specify their areas of drainage.3
AN 10.7 Explain anatomical basis of enlarged axillary lymph nodes.4
Lymphatic Drainage
Lymphatic drainage of the breast assumes great
importance to the surgeon because carcinoma of the
breast spreads mostly along lymphatics to the regional
lymph nodes. The subject can be described under two
heads—the lymph nodes, and the lymphatic vessels.
Lymph Nodes
Groups of lymph nodes are shown in Fig. 3.9.
Lymph from the breast drains into the following
lymph nodes (Fig. 3.9).
1 The axillary lymph nodes, chiefly the anterior (or
pectoral) group. The posterior, lateral, central and
apical groups of nodes also receive lymph from
the breast either directly or indirectly.
2 The anterior thoracic (parasternal) nodes which
lie along the internal mammary (thoracic) vessels
(Fig. 3.10).
3 Some lymph from the breast also reaches the
supraclavicular nodes, the cephalic (deltopectoral)
node, the posterior intercostal nodes (lying in front
of the heads of the ribs), the subdiaphragmatic and
subperitoneal lymph plexuses.
Lymphatic Vessels
1 The superficial lymphatics drain the skin over the
breast except for the nipple and areola. The
lymphatics pass radially to the surrounding lymph
nodes (axillary, anterior thoracic, supraclavicular
and cephalic).
2 The deep lymphatics drain the parenchyma of the breast.
They also drain the nipple and areola (Fig. 3.11).
Some further points of interest about the lymphatic
drainage are as follows.
1 About 75% of the lymph from the breast drains into
the axillary nodes; 20% into the anterior thoracic
Fig. 3.10: The routes of lymph from the breast. The arrows show
the direction of lymph flow
Fig. 3.8: Arterial supply of the breast
Fig. 3.9: Lymph nodes draining the breast. Radial incision is
shown to drain breast abscess
--- Page 65 ---
UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
nodes; and 5% into the posterior intercostal nodes.
Among the axillary nodes, the lymphatics end mostly
in the anterior group (closely related to the axillary
tail), and partly in the posterior and apical groups.
Lymph from the anterior and posterior groups passes
to the central and lateral groups, and through them
to the apical group. Finally, it reaches the supra-
clavicular nodes.
2 The anterior thoracic nodes drain the lymph not only
from the inner half of the breast, but from the outer
half as well.
3 A plexus of lymph vessels is present deep to the
areola. This is the subareolar plexus of Sappey
(Fig. 3.11). Subareolar plexus and most of lymph
from the gland drain into the anterior or pectoral
group of lymph nodes.
4 The lymphatics from the deep surface of the gland
pass through the pectoralis major muscle and the
clavipectoral fascia to reach the apical nodes, and also
to the anterior thoracic nodes (Fig. 3.12).
5 Lymphatics from the lower and inner quadrants of
the breast may communicate with the subdiaphrag-
matic and subperitoneal lymph plexuses after
crossing the costal margin and then piercing the
anterior abdominal wall through the upper part of
the linea alba.
6 Anterior and central groups of nodes are commonly
involved in carcinoma breast.
Competency achievement: The student should be able to:
AN 9.3 Describe development of the breast.5
Development of the Breast
1 The breast develops from an ectodermal thickening,
called the mammary ridge, milk line, or line of Schultz
(Fig. 3.13). This ridge extends from the axilla to the
groin. It appears during the fourth week of
intrauterine life, but in human beings, it disappears
over most of its extent persisting only in the pectoral
region. The gland is ectodermal, and the stroma
mesodermal in origin.
2 The persisting part of the mammary ridge is
converted into a mammary pit. Secondary buds
(15–20) grow down from the floor of the pit. These
buds divide and subdivide to form the lobes of the
gland. The entire system is first solid, but is later
canalised. At birth or later, the nipple is everted at
the site of the original pit.
Figs 3.12a and b: (a) Deep lymphatics of the breast passing to the apical lymph nodes and the structures piercing the clavipectoral
fascia, and (b) structures piercing the clavipectoral fascia. Branches of thoracoacromial artery: a—acromial, p—pectoral, c—clavicular,
d—deltoid
Fig. 3.11: Subareolar lymph plexus of Sappey
--- Page 66 ---
PECTORAL REGION
Upper Limb
Section 1
3 Growth of the mammary glands, at puberty, is
caused by oestrogens. Apart from oestrogens,
development of secretory alveoli is stimulated by
progesterone and by the prolactin hormone of the
hypophysis cerebri.
4 Developmental anomalies of the breast are:
a. Amastia (absence of the breast),
b. Athelia (absence of nipple),
c. Polymastia (supernumerary breasts),
d. Polythelia (supernumerary nipples),
e. Gynaecomastia (development of breasts in a male)
which occurs in Klinefelter’s syndrome.
Histology of Breast
The mammary glands are specialised accessory glands
of the skin, which have evolved in mammals to provide
nourishment to the young ones. Mammary gland
consists of 15–20 lobes with the same number of ducts.
Each lobe is made up of many lobules containing acini.
Histologically, only lobules are discernible in the gland.
Resting Phase in Non-Pregnant Adult Female
The mammary gland in this phase consists mainly of
ducts and their branches (Fig. 3.14). The stroma has
connective tissue and fat cells.
The intralobular ducts are usually lined by low
columnar epithelium resting on a basement membrane.
The intralobular connective tissue which is derived
from the papillary layer of the dermis is more cellular,
containing fibroblasts.
The interlobular connective tissue, which lies
between the ducts of adjacent lobules, is derived from
the reticular layer of the dermis, and is more
fibroreticular in nature. It contains fat lobules.
Lactating Phase
The gland is full of acini with minimum amount of
connective tissue. Some acini are lined by tall columnar
cells, others by normal columnar cells. The nucleus may
be round or oval and is seen in the middle of the cell
(Fig. 3.15). Droplets of fat accumulate near the free
surface of the cell. Myoepithelial cells may be seen
between the basement membrane and secretory cells.
Ducts are also seen, but they are fewer in number as
compared to the acini. The bigger ducts are lined by
stratified columnar or columnar epithelium.
Fig. 3.13: Milk line with possible positions of accessory nipples
Fig. 3.15: Mammary gland—lactating phase
Fig. 3.14: Mammary gland—resting phase
CLINICAL ANATOMY
The upper and outer quadrant of breast is a frequent
site of carcinoma (cancer). The first lymph node
draining the tumour-bearing area is called ‘sentinal
--- Page 67 ---
UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
Fig. 3.16: Peau d’orange appearance
Fig. 3.17: Lymphatic spread of breast cancer
c. Retraction of nipple is a sign of cancer.
d. Discharge from nipple on squeezing it.
e. Palpate all four quadrants with palm of hand.
Note any palpable lump.
f. Raise the arm to feel lymph nodes in axilla.
• Mammogram may reveal cancerous mass
(Fig. 3.19).
• Fine needle aspiration cytology is safe and quick
method of diagnosis of lesion of breast.
Fig. 3.18: Vertebral system of veins
node.’ Abscesses may also form in the breast and
may require drainage. The following facts are worthy
of note.
• Incisions of breast are usually made radially to
avoid cutting the lactiferous ducts (Fig. 3.9).
• Cancer cells may infiltrate the suspensory
ligaments. The breast then becomes fixed.
Contraction of the ligaments can cause retraction
or puckering (folding) of the skin.
• Infiltration of lactiferous ducts and their consequent
fibrosis can cause retraction of the nipple.
• Obstruction of superficial lymph vessels by cancer
cells may produce oedema of the skin giving rise
to an appearance like that of the skin of an orange
(peau d’orange appearance) (Fig. 3.16).
• Because of communications of the superficial
lymphatics of the breast across the midline, cancer
may spread from one breast to the other (Fig. 3.17).
• Because of communications of the lymph vessels
with those in the abdomen, cancer of the breast
may spread to the liver, and cancer cells may
‘drop’ into the pelvis producing secondaries there
(Fig. 3.17).
• Apart from the lymphatics, cancer may spread
through the segmental veins. In this connection,
it is important to know that the veins draining the
breast communicate with the vertebral venous
plexus of veins. Through these communications,
cancer can spread to the vertebrae and to the brain
(Fig. 3.18).
• Carcinoma usually arises from epithelium of large
ducts.
• Self-examination of breasts:
a. Inspect: Symmetry of breasts and nipples.
b. Change in colour of skin.
--- Page 68 ---
PECTORAL REGION
Upper Limb
Section 1
DEEP FASCIA
The deep fascia covering the pectoralis major muscle is
called the pectoral fascia. It is thin and closely attached
to the muscle by numerous septa passing between the
fasciculi of the muscle. It is attached superiorly to the
clavicle, and anteriorly to the sternum. Superolaterally, it
passes over the infraclavicular fossa and deltopectoral
groove to become continuous with the fascia covering
the deltoid. Inferolaterally, the fascia curves round the
inferolateral border of the pectoralis major to become
continuous with the axillary fascia. Inferiorly, it is
continuous with the fascia over the thorax and the rectus
sheath.
Competency achievement: The student should be able to:
AN 9.1 Describe attachment, nerve supply and action of pectoralis
major and pectoralis minor.6
MUSCLES OF THE PECTORAL REGION
Introduction
Muscles of the pectoral region are described in
Tables 3.1 and 3.2, study them on the articulated
skeleton. Some additional features are given below.
Pectoralis Major
Structures under Cover of Pectoralis Major
a. Bones and cartilages: Sternum, costal cartilages and ribs.
b. Fascia: Clavipectoral.
c. Muscles: Subclavius, pectoralis minor, serratus
anterior, intercostals and upper parts of the biceps
brachii and coracobrachialis.
d. Vessels: Axillary.
e. Nerves: Cords of brachial plexus with their branches.
• Retracted nipple is a sign of tumour in the breast.
• Size of mammary gland can be increased by
putting an implant inside the gland. The size can
be reduced by breast reduction surgery.
• Cancer of the mammary glands is the most
common cancer in females of all ages. It is more
frequently seen in postmenopausal females due
to lack of oestrogen hormones.
• Self-examination of the mammary gland is the only
way for early diagnosis and appropriate treatment.
• Mastectomy is the medical term for the surgical
removal of one or both breasts, partially or
completely. A mastectomy is usually carried out
to treat breast cancer. Lumpectomy is the removal
of only the tumour.
• Radical mastectomy is a surgical procedure
involving the removal of breast, underlying
pectoral muscles and lymph nodes of the axilla as
a treatment for advanced breast cancer.
Fig. 3.19: Mammogram showing cancerous lesion
Table 3.1: Muscles of the pectoral region
Muscle
Origin
Insertion
Pectoralis major
• Anterior surface of medial two-thirds of clavicle
It is inserted by a bilaminar tendon on the
(Fig. 3.20)
• Half the breadth of anterior surface of manubrium and
lateral lip of the bicipital groove in form of
sternum up to 6th costal cartilages
• Second to sixth costal cartilages, sternal end of 6th rib
The two laminae are continuous with each
• Aponeurosis of the external oblique muscle of abdomen
other inferiorly
The anterior lamina is thicker and shorter
than the thinner and longer posterior lamina.
Anterior lamina receives superficial clavicular
and deep manubrial fibres; posterior lamina
gets costal, sternal and aponeurotic fibres
Pectoralis minor
• 3, 4, 5 ribs, near the costochondral junction
Medial border and upper surface of the
(Fig. 3.21)
• Intervening fascia covering external intercostal muscles
coracoid process
Subclavius
First rib at the costochondral junction
Subclavian groove in the middle one-third
(Fig. 3.21)
of the clavicle
--- Page 69 ---
UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
to get inserted the highest and form a crescentic fold
which fuses with the capsule of the shoulder joint.
Bilaminar Tendon of Pectoralis Major
The muscle is inserted by a bilaminar tendon into the
lateral lip of the intertubercular sulcus of the humerus.
The anterior lamina is thicker and shorter than the
posterior. It receives two strata of muscle fibres:
Superficial fibres arising from the clavicle and deep
fibres arising from the manubrium (Fig. 3.20).
The posterior lamina is thinner and longer than the
anterior lamina. It is formed by fibres from the front of
the sternum, 2nd–6th costal cartilages, sternal end of
6th rib and from the aponeurosis of the external oblique
muscle of the abdomen. Out of these, only the fibres
from the sternum and aponeurosis are twisted around
the lower border of the rest of the muscle. The twisted
fibres form the anterior axillary fold.
These fibres pass upwards and laterally to get
inserted successively higher into the posterior lamina
of the tendon. Fibres arising lowest, find an opportunity
Fig. 3.21: The pectoralis minor and subclavius muscles
Figs 3.20a and b: (a) The origin and insertion of the pectoralis major muscle, and (b) the bilaminar insertion of the pectoralis
major. The anterior lamina is formed by the clavicular and manubrial fibres; the rest of the sternocostal and aponeurotic fibres form
the base and posterior lamina. Part of the posterior lamina is twisted upside down
Table 3.2: Nerve supply and actions of muscles
Muscle
Nerve supply
Actions
Pectoralis major
Medial and lateral pectoral nerves
• Acting as a whole the muscle causes: Adduction and
(Fig. 3.20)
Medial pectoral reaches it after piercing
medial rotation of the shoulder joint (arm)
pectoralis minor. The lateral pectoral reaches
• Clavicular part produces: Flexion of the arm
the muscle by piercing clavipectoral fascia
• Sternocostal part is used in
– Extension of flexed arm against resistance
Pectoralis minor
Medial and lateral pectoral nerves
• Draws the scapula forward (with serratus anterior)
(Fig. 3.21)
(Fig. 3.22a)
• Depresses the point of the shoulder
Subclavius
Nerve to subclavius from upper trunk of
Steadies the clavicle during movements of the shoulder
(Fig. 3.21)
brachial plexus
joint. Forms a cushion for axillary vessels and divisions
of trunks of brachial plexus
--- Page 70 ---
PECTORAL REGION
Upper Limb
Section 1
Clinical Testing
i. The clavicular head is made prominent by flexing
the arm to a right angle. The sternocostal head can
be tested by extending the flexed arm against
resistance.
ii. Sternocostal head is made prominent by abducting
arm to 60° and then touching the opposite hip.
iii. Pressing the fists against each other makes the whole
muscle prominent (Fig. 3.22b).
iv. Lifting a heavy rod makes clavicular part prominent
(right arm). Depressing a heavy rod shows
sternocostal part as prominent (left arm) (Fig. 3.22c).
Clavipectoral Fascia
Clavipectoral fascia is a fibrous sheet situated deep to
the clavicular portion of the pectoralis major muscle. It
extends from the clavicle above to the axillary fascia
below (Fig. 3.23). Its upper part splits to enclose the
subclavius muscle. The posterior lamina is fused to the
investing layer of the deep cervical fascia and to the
axillary sheath. Inferiorly, the clavipectoral fascia splits
to enclose the pectoralis minor muscle (see Fig. 4.3).
Medially, it is attached to external intercostal muscle
of upper intercostal spaces and laterally to coracoid
process. Below this muscle, it continues as the
suspensory ligament which is attached to the dome of
the axillary fascia, and helps to maintain it.
The clavipectoral fascia is pierced by the following
structures.
i. Lateral pectoral nerve (Figs 3.12a and b).
ii. Cephalic vein.
Fig. 3.22a: Nerve supply of pectorals, subclavius and serratus
anterior
Figs 3.22b and c: Pectoralis major being tested
Fig. 3.23: Clavipectoral fascia
--- Page 71 ---
UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
iii. Thoracoacromial artery.
iv. Lymphatics passing from the breast and pectoral
region to the apical group of axillary lymph nodes
(Fig. 3.12a).
Competency achievement: The student should be able to:
AN 10.11 Describe and demonstrate attachment of serratus
anterior with its action.7
Serratus Anterior
Serratus anterior muscle is not strictly muscle of the
pectoral region, but it is convenient to consider it here.
It is also called boxer’s muscle/swimmer’s muscle.
Origin
Serratus anterior muscle arises by eight digitations from
the upper 8 ribs in the midaxillary plane and from the
fascia covering the intervening intercostal muscles. The
first digitation appears in the posterior triangle of neck.
It arises from the outer border of 1st rib and from a rough
impression on the 2nd rib. Also 5th–8th digitations
interdigitate with the costal origin of external oblique
muscle of abdomen.
Insertion
All 8 digitations pass backwards around the chest wall.
The muscle is inserted into the costal surface of the
scapula along its medial border.
The first digitation is inserted from the superior angle
to the root of the spine.
The next two digitations are inserted lower down
on the medial border.
The lower five digitations are inserted into a large
triangular area over the inferior angle (Fig. 3.25).
Nerve Supply
The nerve to the serratus anterior is a branch of the
brachial plexus. It arises from roots C5, C6 and C7 and
is also called long thoracic nerve. The nerve enters
through the apex of axilla behind 1st part of axillary
artery to reach the medial wall of axilla. It lies on the
surface of the muscle (Figs 3.22a and 3.24a).
• C5 root supplies 1st and 2nd digitations.
Fig. 3.25: Horizontal section through the axilla showing the
position of the serratus anterior
Figs 3.24a and b: (a) The serratus anterior; (b) schematic representation
--- Page 72 ---
PECTORAL REGION
Upper Limb
Section 1
CLINICOANATOMICAL PROBLEM
A 45-year-old woman complained of a firm painless
mass in the upper lateral quadrant of her left breast.
The nipple was also raised. Axillary lymph nodes were
palpable and firm. It was diagnosed as cancer breast.
• Where does the lymph from upper lateral
quadrant drain?
• What causes the retraction of the nipple?
Ans: The lymph from the upper lateral quadrant
drains mainly into the pectoral group of axillary
lymph nodes. The lymphatics also drain into
supraclavicular and infraclavicular lymph nodes.
Blockage of some lymph vessels by the cancer cells
causes oedema of skin with dimpled appearance.
This is called peau d’orange. When cancer cells
invade the suspensory ligaments, glandular tissue
or the ducts, there is retraction of the nipple.
FURTHER READING
• Ellis H, Colborn GL, Skandalakis JE. Surgical embryology
and anatomy of the breast and its related anatomic structures.
Surg Clin North Am 1993;73:611–32.
• Streit JJ, Lenarz CJ, Shishani Y, et al. Pectoralis major tendon
transfer for the treatment of scapular winging due to long
thoracic nerve palsy. J shoulder Elbow Surg 2012;21:685–90.
The largest series of the direct or indirect transfer of the sternal
head of pectoralis major for insufficiency of serratus anterior in
symptomatic scapular dyskinesia.
Mnemonics
Branches of any artery/nerve M-CAT
M—Muscular
C—Cutaneous
A—Articular
T—Terminal
FACTS TO REMEMBER
• Pectoralis major forms part of the bed for the
mammary gland. 75% of lymph from mammary
gland drains into axillary; 20% into anterior
thoracic and 5% into posterior intercostal lymph
nodes.
• The sternocostal head of pectoralis major causes
extension of the flexed arm against resistance.
• Pectoralis minor divides the axillary artery into
three parts.
• C6 root supplies 3rd and 4th digitations.
• C7 root supplies 5th to 8th digitations.
Actions
1 Along with the pectoralis minor, the muscle pulls the
scapula forwards around the chest wall to protract the
upper limb (in pushing and punching movements).
2 The fibres inserted into the inferior angle of the
scapula pull it forwards and rotate the scapula so
that the glenoid cavity is turned upwards. In this
action, the serratus anterior is helped by the trapezius
which pulls the acromion process upwards and
backwards (see Fig. 10.6c).
3 The muscle steadies the scapula during weight
carrying.
4 It helps in forced inspiration.
Additional Features
1 Paralysis of the serratus anterior produces ‘winging
of scapula’ in which the inferior angle and the medial
border of the scapula are unduly prominent. The
patient is unable to do any pushing action, nor can
he raise his arm above the head. Any attempt to do
these movements makes the inferior angle of the
scapula still more prominent.
2 Clinical testing: Forward pressure with the hands
against a wall, or against resistance offered by the
examiner, makes the medial border and the inferior
angle of the scapula prominent (winging of scapula),
if the serratus anterior is paralysed (see Fig. 2.12).
DISSECTION
Identify the extensive pectoralis major muscle in the
pectoral region and the prominent deltoid muscle on
the lateral aspect of the shoulder joint and upper arm.
Demarcate the deltopectoral groove by removing the
deep fascia. Now identify the cephalic vein, a small
artery and a few lymph nodes in the groove.
Clean the fascia over the pectoralis major muscle
and look for its attachments. Divide the clavicular head
of the muscle and reflect it laterally. Medial and lateral
pectoral nerves will be seen supplying the muscle.
Make a vertical incision 5 to 6 cm from the lateral border
of sternum and reflect its sternocostal head laterally.
Identify the pectoralis minor muscle under the central
part of the pectoralis major. Note clavipectoral fascia
extending between pectoralis minor muscle and the
clavicle bone (refer to BDC App).
Identify the structures piercing the clavipectoral
fascia: These are cephalic vein, thoracoacromial artery
and lateral pectoral nerve. If some fine vessels are also
seen, these are the lymphatic channels.
Also, identify the serratus anterior muscle showing
serrated digitations on the side of the chest wall.
1–7 From Medical Council of India, Competency based Undergraduate Curriculum for the Indian Medical Graduate, 2018;1:44–80.
--- Page 73 ---
UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
1. b
2. c
3. b
4. b
5. d
• Name the cutaneous nerves innervating the skin of
pectoral region.
• What muscles form the deep relations of the
mammary gland?
• What is axillary tail and what is its importance?
• Where does the lymph from breast drain?
• Name the arteries supplying the breast.
• What structures pierce the clavipectoral fascia?
• What is peau d'orange appearance of the skin
overlying the breast?
• How can cancer of one breast spread to other breast;
to abdomen or pelvis or spread to cranial cavity?
• How does one examine the clavicular and
sternocostal heads of pectoralis major muscle?
• How is the integrity of serratus anterior muscle tested?
• Which muscle divides the axillary artery in three
parts?
1. Which of the following muscles does not form deep
relation of the mammary gland?
a. Pectoralis major
b. Pectoralis minor
c. Serratus anterior
d. External oblique muscle of abdomen
2. One of the following structures does not pierce
clavipectoral fascia:
a. Cephalic vein
b. Thoracoacromial artery
c. Medial pectoral nerve
d. Lateral pectoral nerve
3. Which of the following arteries does not supply the
mammary gland?
a. Superior thoracic
b. Thoracodorsal branch of subscapular artery
c. Lateral thoracic artery
d. Thoracoacromial artery
4. Axillary sheath is derived from which fascia?
a. Pretracheal
b. Prevertebral
c. Investing layer of cervical
d. Pharyngobasilar
5. Winging of scapula occurs in paralysis of:
a. Pectoralis major
b. Pectoralis minor
c. Latissimus dorsi
d. Serratus anterior
1. Describe mammary gland under following
headings: Extent, relations, blood supply, lymphatic
drainage and clinical anatomy.
2. Describe pectoralis major muscle under following
headings: Origin, insertion, nerve supply, structures
deep to it, actions and clinical anatomy.
3. Write short notes/enumerate:
a. Structures piercing clavipectoral fascia
b. Winging of scapula
c. Origin and insertion of pectoralis minor muscle
d. Root value of long thoracic nerve
--- Page 74 ---
Competency achievement: The student should be able to:
AN 10.1 Identify and describe boundaries and contents of axilla.1
INTRODUCTION
The axilla (Latin armpit) is a pyramidal space situated
between the upper part of the arm and the chest wall.
It resembles a four-sided pyramid, and has the
following.
i. An apex
ii. A base
iii. Four walls: Anterior, posterior, medial and lateral.
The axilla is disposed obliquely in such a way that
the apex is directed upwards and medially towards the
root of the neck, and the base is directed downwards
(Figs 4.1a and b).
DISSECTION
Place a rectangular wooden block under the neck and
shoulder region of cadaver (Fig. 4.1). Ensure that the
block supports the body firmly. Abduct the limb at right
angles to the trunk; and strap the wrist firmly on block
projecting towards your side. In continuation with earlier
dissection, reflect the lower skin flap till the posterior
axillary fold, made up by the subscapularis, teres major,
and latissimus dorsi muscles, is seen. Clean the fat,
and remove the lymph nodes and superficial veins to
reach depth of the armpit. Identify two muscles arising
from the tip of the coracoid process of scapula; out of
these, the short head of biceps brachii muscle lies on
the lateral side and the coracobrachialis on the medial
side (refer to BDC App).
The pectoral muscles with the clavipectoral fascia
form anterior boundary of the region.
Look for upper three intercostal muscles and serratus
anterior muscle which make the medial wall of axilla.
Clean and identify the axillary vessels. Trace the
course of the branches of the axillary artery.
Reflect the upper skin flap on the arm till the incision
already given at its junction of upper one-third and lower
two-thirds.
BOUNDARIES
Apex/Cervicoaxillary Canal
It is directed upwards and medially towards the root
of the neck.
Axilla
Tailors know about the asymmetry of the arm and stitch the right sleeve a little looser than left 
—Anonymous
Figs 4.1a and b: (a) Dissection of axilla, and (b) position of
axilla
--- Page 75 ---
UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
It is truncated (not pointed), and corresponds to a
triangular interval bounded:
i. Anteriorly, by the posterior surface of clavicle.
ii. Posteriorly, by the superior border of the scapula
and medial aspect of coracoid process.
iii. Medially, it is bounded by the outer border of
the first rib.
This oblique passage is called the cervicoaxillary
canal (Figs 4.2a to c). The axillary artery, axillary vein
and the brachial plexus enter the axilla through this
canal.
Base or Floor
It is directed downwards, and is formed by skin,
superficial and axillary fasciae. It is convex upwards in
congruence with concavity of axilla.
Anterior Wall
It is formed by the following.
i. The pectoralis major in front (Fig. 4.3).
ii. The clavipectoral fascia
iii. Pectoralis minor.
Posterior Wall
It is formed by the following.
i. Subscapularis above (Fig. 4.4),
ii. Teres major, and
iii. Latissimus dorsi below.
Figs 4.2a to c: (a) Boundaries of the apex of the axilla, (b) walls of the axilla, and (c) opened up axilla
Fig. 4.3: Anterior and posterior walls of the axilla with the axillary
artery
--- Page 76 ---
AXILLA
Upper Limb
Section 1
3 Infraclavicular part of the brachial plexus.
4 Five groups of axillary lymph nodes and the
associated lymphatics.
5 The long thoracic and intercostobrachial nerves.
6 Axillary fat and areolar tissue in which the other
contents are embedded.
Layout
1 Axillary artery and the brachial plexus of nerves run
from the apex to the base along the lateral wall of
the axilla, nearer the anterior wall than the posterior
wall.
2 The thoracic branches of the axillary artery lie in
contact with the pectoral muscles, the lateral thoracic
vessels running along the lower border of the
pectoralis minor (Fig. 4.10a).
3 a. The subscapular vessels run along the lower
border of the subscapularis.
b. The subscapular nerves and the thoracodorsal
nerve (nerve to latissimus dorsi) cross the anterior
surface of the subscapularis (Fig. 4.4).
c. The circumflex scapular vessels wind round the
lateral border of the scapula (see Fig. 6.12).
d. The axillary nerve and the posterior circumflex
humeral vessels pass backwards close to the
surgical neck of the humerus.
4 a. The medial wall of the axilla is avascular, except
for a few small branches from the superior thoracic
artery.
b. The long thoracic nerve (nerve to the serratus
anterior) descends on the surface of the muscle
(Fig. 4.5).
c. The intercostobrachial nerve pierces the antero-
superior part of the medial wall and crosses the spa-
ces to reach the medial side of the arm (see Fig. 3.3).
Medial Wall
It is convex laterally and formed by the following.
i. Upper four ribs with their intercostal muscles.
ii. Upper part of the serratus anterior muscle (Fig. 4.5).
Lateral Wall
It is very narrow because the anterior and posterior
walls converge on it. It is formed by the following.
i. Upper part of the shaft of the humerus in the region
of the bicipital groove, and
ii. Coracobrachialis and short head of the biceps
brachii (Fig. 4.5).
CONTENTS OF AXILLA
1 Axillary artery and its branches (Figs 4.6 and 4.7).
2 Axillary vein and its tributaries.
Fig. 4.5: Walls and contents of axilla
Fig. 4.4: Muscles forming the posterior wall of axilla with their
nerve supply
--- Page 77 ---
UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
5 The axillary lymph nodes are 20 to 30 in number,
and are arranged in five sets.
a. The anterior group lies along the lower border of
the pectoralis minor, on the lateral thoracic vessels.
b. The posterior group lies along the lower margin
of the posterior wall along the subscapular vessels.
c. The lateral group lies posteromedial to the axillary
vein (Fig. 4.11).
d. The central group lies in the fat of the axilla.
e. The apical group lies behind and above the
pectoralis minor, medial to the axillary vein.
CLINICAL ANATOMY
• The axilla has abundant axillary hair. Infection of
the hair follicles and sebaceous glands gives rise
to boils which are common in this area.
Competency achievement: The student should be able to:
AN 10.2 Identify, describe and demonstrate the origin, extent,
course, parts, relations and branches of axillary artery and tributaries
of vein.2
AXILLARY ARTERY
Axillary artery is the continuation of the subclavian
artery. It extends from the outer border of the first rib
to the lower border of the teres major muscle where it
continues as the brachial artery. Its direction varies with
the position of the arm.
The pectoralis minor muscle crosses the artery and
divides it into three parts (Fig. 4.6).
• First part, superior (proximal) to the muscle.
• Second part, posterior (deep) to the muscle.
• Third part, inferior (distal) to the muscle.
RELATIONS OF AXILLARY ARTERY
Relations of First Part
Anterior
1 Skin
2 Superficial fascia, platysma and supraclavicular nerves
3 Deep fascia
4 Clavicular part of the pectoralis major (Fig. 4.7a)
5 Clavipectoral fascia with cephalic vein, lateral
pectoral nerve, and thoracoacromial artery.
6 Loop of communication between the lateral and
medial pectoral nerves.
Posterior
1 First intercostal space with the external intercostal
muscle.
2 First and second digitations of the serratus anterior
with the nerve to serratus anterior.
3 Medial cord of brachial plexus with its medial
pectoral branch.
Fig. 4.7a: Diagrammatic relations of first part of axillary artery
Fig. 4.6: The extent and parts of the axillary artery
--- Page 78 ---
AXILLA
Upper Limb
Section 1
Lateral
Lateral and posterior cords of the brachial plexus.
Medial
Axillary vein: The first part of the axillary artery is
enclosed (together with the brachial plexus) in the
axillary sheath, derived from the prevertebral layer of
deep cervical fascia.
Relations of Second Part
Anterior
1 Skin
2 Superficial fascia
3 Deep fascia
4 Pectoralis major
5 Pectoralis minor (Fig. 4.7b)
Fig. 4.7b: Diagrammatic relations of second part of axillary artery
Fig. 4.7c: Diagrammatic relations of third part of axillary artery (upper part)
Fig. 4.7d: Diagrammatic relations of third part of axillary artery (lower part)
--- Page 79 ---
UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
Posterior
1 Posterior cord of brachial plexus
2 Subscapularis
Lateral
1 Lateral cord of brachial plexus
2 Coracobrachialis (Fig. 4.8)
Medial
1 Medial cord of brachial plexus
2 Medial pectoral nerve
3 Axillary vein
Relations of Third Part
Anterior
1 Skin
2 Superficial fascia
3 Deep fascia
4 In the upper part, there are the pectoralis major and
the medial root of the median nerve (Fig. 4.7c).
Posterior
1 Radial nerve (Fig. 4.9)
2 Axillary nerve in the upper part
3 Subscapularis in the upper part
4 Tendons of the latissimus dorsi and the teres major
in the lower part (Fig. 4.7d).
Fig. 4.8: Relation of the brachial plexus to the axillary artery. C5–
C8 and T1 are ventral primary rami of respective spinal segments.
LC—lateral cord; MC—medial cord; MR—medial root; LR—
lateral root; M—median nerve; U—ulnar nerve; Mc—
musculocutaneous nerve
Fig. 4.9: Relations of branches of brachial plexus to the axillary vessels
--- Page 80 ---
AXILLA
Upper Limb
Section 1
Figs 4.10a and b: The branches of the axillary artery
Lateral
1 Coracobrachialis
2 Musculocutaneous nerve in the upper part (Fig. 4.8)
3 Lateral root of median nerve in the upper part
4 Trunk of median nerve in the lower part.
Medial
1 Axillary vein
2 Medial cutaneous nerve of the forearm and ulnar
nerve, between the axillary artery and the axillary vein
3 Medial cutaneous nerve of arm, medial to the axillary
vein (Fig. 4.9).
Branches
The axillary artery gives six branches. One branch arises
from the first part, two branches from the second part,
and three branches from the third part. These are as
follows (Fig. 4.10).
Superior Thoracic Artery
Superior thoracic artery is a very small branch which
arises from the first part of the axillary artery (near the
subclavius). It runs downwards, forwards and medially,
passes between the two pectoral muscles, and ends by
supplying these muscles and the thoracic wall (Fig. 4.10).
Thoracoacromial (Acromiothoracic) Artery
Thoracoacromial artery is a branch from the second part
of the axillary artery. It emerges at the upper border of
the pectoralis minor, pierces the clavipectoral fascia, and
soon divides into the following four terminal branches.
a. The pectoral branch passes between the pectoral
muscles, and supplies these muscles as well as the
breast.
b. The deltoid branch runs in the deltopectoral groove,
along with the cephalic vein.
c. The acromial branch crosses the coracoid process and
ends by joining the anastomoses over the acromion
process.
d. The clavicular branch runs superomedially deep to the
pectoralis major, and supplies the acromioclavicular
joint and subclavius.
Lateral Thoracic Artery
Lateral thoracic artery is a branch of the second part of
the axillary artery. It emerges at, and runs along, the
lower border of the pectoralis minor in close relation
with the anterior group of axillary lymph nodes.
In females, the artery is large and gives off the lateral
mammary branches to the breast.
--- Page 81 ---
UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
Subscapular Artery
Subscapular artery is the largest branch of the axillary
artery, arising from its third part. It runs along the lower
border of the subscapularis to terminate near the
inferior angle of the scapula. It supplies the latissimus
dorsi and the serratus anterior.
It gives off a large branch, the circumflex scapular
artery, which is larger than the continuation of the
main artery. This branch passes through the upper
triangular intermuscular space, winds around the
lateral border of the scapula between two slips of the
teres minor, and gives a branch to the subscapular
fossa, and another branch to the infraspinous fossa,
both of which take part in the anastomoses around the
scapula (see Fig. 6.12).
Anterior Circumflex Humeral Artery
Anterior circumflex humeral artery is a small branch
arising from the third part of the axillary artery, at the
lower border of the subscapularis.
It passes laterally in front of the intertubercular
sulcus of the humerus, and anastomoses with the
posterior circumflex humeral artery, to form an arterial
circle round the surgical neck of the humerus.
It gives off an ascending branch which runs in the
intertubercular sulcus, and supplies the head of the
humerus and shoulder joint (Fig. 4.10b).
Posterior Circumflex Humeral Artery
Posterior circumflex humeral artery is much larger than
the anterior artery. It arises from the third part of the
axillary artery at the lower border of the subscapularis.
It runs backwards, accompanied by the axillary nerve,
passes through the quadrangular intermuscular space,
and ends by anastomosing with the anterior circumflex
humeral artery around the surgical neck of the humerus
(see Figs 6.6 and 6.12).
It supplies the shoulder joint, the deltoid, and the
muscles bounding the quadrangular space.
It gives off a descending branch which anastomoses
with the ascending branch of the profunda brachii artery.
Anastomoses and Collateral Circulation
The branches of the axillary artery anastomose with one
another and with branches derived from neighbouring
arteries (internal thoracic, intercostal, suprascapular,
deep branch of transverse cervical, profunda brachii).
When the axillary artery is blocked, a collateral
circulation is established through the anastomoses
around the scapula which links the first part of the
subclavian artery with the third part of the axillary
artery (apart from communications with the posterior
intercostal arteries) (see Fig. 6.12).
CLINICAL ANATOMY
• Axillary arterial pulsations can be felt against the
lower part of the lateral wall of the axilla.
In order to check bleeding from the distal part of
the limb (in injuries, operations and amputations),
the artery can be effectively compressed against
the humerus in the lower part of the lateral wall
of the axilla.
AXILLARY VEIN
The axillary vein is the continuation of the basilic vein.
The axillary vein is joined by the venae comitantes of
the brachial artery, a little above the lower border of
the teres major. It lies on the medial side of the axillary
artery (Fig. 4.9). At the outer border of the first rib, it
becomes the subclavian vein. It receives 5 out of 6
tributaries corresponding to the branches of axillary
artery and the cephalic vein. Veins accompanying
branches of thoracoacromial artery drain directly into
the cephalic vein.
Lateral thoracic vein of upper limb is joined to
superficial epigastric vein of lower limb by thoraco-
epigastric vein enabling blood to return to heart in
blockage of inferior vena cava (see Flowcharts 14.1 and
14.2).
Competency achievement: The student should be able to:
AN 10.4 Describe the anatomical groups of axillary lymph nodes
and specify their areas of drainage.3
AN 10.7 Explain anatomical basis of enlarged axillary lymph nodes.4
AXILLARY LYMPH NODES
The axillary lymph nodes are scattered in the fibrofatty
tissue of the axilla. They are divided into five groups.
1 The nodes of the anterior (pectoral) group lie along the
lateral thoracic vessels, i.e. along the lower border
of the pectoralis minor. They receive lymph from the
upper half of the anterior wall of the trunk, and from
the major part of the breast (Fig. 4.11).
2 The nodes of the posterior (scapular) group lie along
the subscapular vessels on the posterior fold of the
axilla. They receive lymph from the posterior wall
of the upper half of the trunk, and from the axillary
tail of the breast.
3 The nodes of the lateral group lie along the upper part
of the humerus, medial to the axillary vein. They
receive lymph from the upper limb.
4 The nodes of the central group lie in the fat of the
upper axilla. They receive lymph from the preceding
groups and drain into the apical group. They receive
some direct vessels from the floor of the axilla. The
intercostobrachial nerve is closely related to them.
5 The nodes of the apical or infraclavicular group lie deep
to the clavipectoral fascia, along the axillary vessels.
--- Page 82 ---
AXILLA
Upper Limb
Section 1
these lymph nodes is, therefore, important in
clinical practice. Left axillary nodes to be palpated
by right hand. Right axillary nodes have to be
palpated by left hand.
• An axillary abscess should be incised through the
floor of the axilla, midway between the anterior
and posterior axillary folds, and nearer to the
medial wall in order to avoid injury to the main
vessels running along the anterior, posterior and
lateral walls.
SPINAL NERVE
Each spinal nerve is formed by union of dorsal root
and ventral root. Dorsal root is sensory and is
characterised by the presence of spinal or dorsal root
ganglion and enters the dorsal horn and posterior
funiculus of spinal cord. Ventral root is motor, arises
from anterior horn cells of spinal cord (Fig. 4.13).
The motor and sensory fibres get united in the
spinal nerve which divides into short dorsal ramus and
long ventral ramus. Both the rami thus contain motor
and sensory fibres. In addition, these also manage to
obtain sympathetic fibres via grey ramus communicans.
Only the ventral primary rami form plexuses.
Brachial plexus is formed by ventral primary rami
of C5–C8 and T1 segments of spinal cord.
Competency achievement: The student should be able to:
AN 10.3 Describe, identify and demonstrate formation, branches,
relations, area of supply of branches, course and relations of
terminal branches of brachial plexus.5
AN 10.5 Explain variations in formation of brachial plexus.6
BRACHIAL PLEXUS
The plexus consists of roots, trunks, divisions, cords
and branches (Fig. 4.14).
Roots
These are constituted by the anterior primary rami
of spinal nerves C5–C8 and T1, with occasional
contributions from the anterior primary rami of C4 and
T2 (Fig. 4.8).
The origin of the plexus may shift by one segment
either upward or downward, resulting in a prefixed or
postfixed plexus, respectively.
In a prefixed plexus, the contribution by C4 is large
and C5 is present , T1 is small, from T2 is often absent.
In a postfixed plexus, the contribution by T1 is
large, T2 is always present, C4 is absent, and C5 is
reduced in size. The roots join to form trunks as
follows.
Fig. 4.12: Lymph above umbilicus drains into axillary lymph
nodes while below umbilicus drains into inguinal group
Fig. 4.11: The axillary lymph nodes
They receive lymph from the central group, from the
upper part of the breast, and from the thumb and its
web. The lymphatics from the thumb accompany the
cephalic vein.
Anterior and central groups of nodes are often
involved in carcinoma breast.
CLINICAL ANATOMY
• The axillary lymph nodes drain lymph not only
from the upper limb but also from the breast and
the anterior and posterior body walls above the
level of the umbilicus. Therefore, infections or
malignant growths in any part of their territory
of drainage give rise to involvement of the axillary
lymph nodes (Fig. 4.12). Bimanual examination of
--- Page 84 ---
AXILLA
Upper Limb
Section 1
Roots and Trunks—Supraclavicular Part
Roots C5 and C6 join to form the upper trunk. Root C7
forms the middle trunk. Roots C8 and T1 join to form
the lower trunk. These lie in the neck between scalenus
anterior and scalenus medius muscles, carrying axillary
sheath from prevertebral fascia (see Fig. 12.10).
Divisions of the trunks—Retroclavicular Part
Each trunk (three in number) divides into ventral and
dorsal divisions (which ultimately supply the anterior
and posterior aspects of the limb). These divisions join
to form cords.
Cords and Branches—Infraclavicular Part
i. The lateral cord is formed by the union of ventral
divisions of the upper and middle trunks (two
divisions).
ii. The medial cord is formed by the ventral division
of the lower trunk (one division).
iii. The posterior cord is formed by union of the dorsal
divisions of all the three trunks (three divisions).
These are named according to relation of cords to
the 2nd part of axillary artery.
Sympathetic Innervation
1 Sympathetic nerves for the upper limb are derived
from spinal segments T2 to T6. Most of the vaso-
constrictor fibres supplying the arteries emerge from
segments T2 and T3.
2 The preganglionic fibres arise from lateral horn cells
and emerge from the spinal cord through ventral
nerve roots.
3 Passing through white rami communicantes, they
reach the sympathetic chain.
4 They ascend within the chain and end in the middle
cervical, inferior cervical and first thoracic ganglia.
5 Postganglionic fibres from middle cervical ganglion
pass through grey rami communicantes to reach C5,
and C6 nerve roots.
6 Postganglionic fibres from inferior cervical ganglion
pass through grey rami communicantes to reach C7,
and C8 nerve roots.
7 Postganglionic fibres from first thoracic sympathetic
ganglion pass through grey rami communicantes to
reach T1 nerve roots.
8 The arteries of skeletal muscles are dilated by
sympathetic activity. For the skin, however, these
nerves are vasomotor, sudomotor and pilomotor.
Vasomotor: Constricts the arterioles of skin.
Sudomotor: Increases the sweat secretion.
Pilomotor: Contracts the arrector pilorum muscle to
cause erection of the hair.
Branches
The roots value of each branch is given in brackets.
Branches of the Roots
The roots value of each branch is given in brackets.
1 Nerve to serratus anterior (long thoracic nerve) (C5–
C7). It only supplies serratus anterior muscle, one of
the key muscles, for overhead abduction.
2 Nerve to rhomboids (dorsal scapular nerve) (C5).
This nerve supplies rhomboid minor and rhomboid
major muscles, responsible for retraction of the
shoulder girdle gives a branch to levator scapulae.
3 Branches to longus colli and scaleni muscles (C5–C8)
and branch to phrenic nerve (C4). The root of phrenic
nerve from C5 is small one, the main root is from C4.
Phrenic nerve is the sole motor nerve supply of
thoracoabdominal diaphragm. In addition, it carries
afferent fibres from mediastinal pleura, fibrous
pericardium and part of the parietal peritoneum.
Branches of the Trunks
These arise only from the upper trunk which gives two
branches:
1 Suprascapular (C5, C6). This nerve supplies
supraspinatus and infraspinatus muscles.
2 Nerve to subclavius (C5, C6). It supplies the small
subclavius muscles. It may give a root for phrenic
nerve.
Branches of the Cords
Branches of lateral cord
1 Lateral pectoral (C5–C7). This nerve supplies both
pectoralis major and pectoralis minor muscles.
2 Musculocutaneous (C5–C7). This is the nerve of
muscles of front of arm, i.e. coracobrachialis both the
long and short heads of biceps brachii and the
brachialis muscles.
3 Lateral root of median (C5–C7). It joins the medial
root of median nerve. Median nerve is the chief nerve
of the muscles of front of forearm and of muscles of
thenar eminence.
Branches of medial cord
1 Medial pectoral (C8, T1). It also supplies both the
pectoralis minor and pectoralis major muscles.
2 Medial cutaneous nerve of arm (C8, T1) carries
sensory impulses from a small area of medial side of
arm.
3 Medial cutaneous nerve of forearm (C8, T1) carries
sensory impulses from large area of medial side of
the forearm.
4 Ulnar (C7, C8, T1). C7 fibres reach by a communi-
cating branch from lateral root of median nerve.
--- Page 85 ---
UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
Fig. 4.15: Erb’s point
This is the nerve of one and a half muscles of front
of forearm and 15 intrinsic muscles of the palm.
5 Medial root of median (C8, T1). It joins the lateral
root and gets distributed with branches of median
nerve.
Branches of posterior cord
1 Upper subscapular (C5, C6). This nerve supplies
large multipennate subscapularis muscles.
2 Nerve to latissimus dorsi (C6–C8). Only supplies
muscles of its name. It is also called thoracodorsal
nerve.
3 Lower subscapular (C5, C6). It helps upper
subscapular nerve in supplying of the subscapularis
muscles. In addition, it supplies the teres major
muscle.
4 Axillary (circumflex) (C5, C6). It is responsible for
supplying one of the important muscles of the
shoulder, the deltoid. It also supplies small teres
minor muscle.
5 Radial (C5–C8, T1). This is the thickest branch of
brachial plexus. It supplies all the three heads of
triceps brachii muscle. Then it supplies 12 muscles
on the back of forearm.
In addition to the branches of the brachial plexus,
the upper limb is also supplied, near the trunk, by the
supraclavicular branches of the cervical plexus, and by
the intercostobrachial branch of the second intercostal
nerve. Sympathetic nerves are distributed through the
brachial plexus. The arrangement of the various nerves
in the axilla, was studied with the relations of the
axillary artery.
Special Features
The lateral cord, medial cord and their branches form
the letter ‘M’ with the three corners extended
(Fig. 4.8 inset). Lateral cord gives musculocutaneous
and lateral root of median.
Medial cord gives ulnar and medial root of median.
The lateral and medial roots of median nerve join to
form the median nerve.
Blood Supply of Brachial Plexus
Vertebral artery and thyrocervical trunk with its
branches, the suprascapular and transverse cervical
arteries, supply blood to the brachial plexus. These are
the life line of this important plexus.
DISSECTION
After cleaning the branches of the axillary artery,
proceed to clean the brachial plexus. It is formed by
the ventral primary rami of the lower four cervicals
(C5–C8) and the first thoracic (T1) nerves. The first
and second parts of the axillary artery are related to
the cords; and third part is related to the branches of
the plexus. Study the description of the brachial plexus
before proceeding further (refer to BDC App).
Competency achievement: The student should be able to:
AN 10.6 Explain the anatomical basis of clinical features of Erb’s
palsy and Klumpke’s paralysis.7
CLINICAL ANATOMY
Global total brachial plexus birth baby is the most
severe type of paralysis.
Erb’s Paralysis
Site of injury: One region of the upper trunk of the
brachial plexus is called Erb’s point (Fig. 4.15). Six
nerves meet here. Injury to the upper trunk causes
Erb’s paralysis.
Causes of injury: Undue separation of the head from
the shoulder, which is commonly encountered in the
following.
i. Birth injury/difficult childbirth
ii. Fall on the shoulder
iii. During anaesthesia.
Nerve roots involved: Mainly C5 and partly C6.
Muscles paralysed: Mainly biceps brachii, deltoid,
brachialis and brachioradialis. Partly supraspinatus,
infraspinatus and supinator.
Deformity and position of the limb:
• Arm: Hangs by the side; it is adducted and
medially rotated.
• Forearm: Extended and pronated.
The deformity is known as ‘policeman’s tip hand’
or waiter’s tip hand or ‘porter’s tip hand’ (Fig. 4.16).
Disability: The following movements are lost.
--- Page 86 ---
AXILLA
Upper Limb
Section 1
• Abduction and lateral rotation of the arm at
shoulder joint.
• Flexion and supination of the forearm.
• Biceps and supinator jerks are lost.
• Sensations are lost over a small area over the
lower part of the deltoid.
Klumpke’s Paralysis
Site of injury: Lower trunk of the brachial plexus.
Cause of injury: Undue abduction of the arm, as in
clutching something with the hands after a fall from a
height, or sometimes in birth injury.
Nerve roots involved: Mainly T1 and partly C8.
Muscles paralysed
• Intrinsic muscles of the hand (T1).
• Ulnar flexors of the wrist and fingers (C8).
Deformity and position of the hand: Claw hand due to
the unopposed action of the long flexors and extensors
of the fingers. In a claw hand, there is hyperextension
at the metacarpophalangeal joints and flexion at the
interphalangeal joints.
Disability:
• Complete claw hand (Fig. 4.17).
• Cutaneous anaesthesia and analgesia in a narrow
zone along the ulnar border of the forearm and hand.
• Horner’s syndrome: If T1 is injured proximal to white
ramus communicans to first thoracic sympathetic
ganglion, there is ptosis, miosis, anhydrosis,
enophthalmos, and loss of ciliospinal reflex—may
be associated. This is because of injury to
sympathetic fibres to the head and neck that leave
the spinal cord through nerve T1 (Fig. 4.18).
• Vasomotor changes: The skin area with sensory loss
is warmer due to arteriolar dilation. It is also drier
due to the absence of sweating as there is loss of
sympathetic activity.
• Trophic changes: Long-standing case of paralysis
leads to dry and scaly skin. The nails crack easily
with atrophy of the pulp of fingers.
Injury to the Nerve to Serratus Anterior (Nerve of Bell)
Causes:
1 Sudden pressure on the shoulder from above.
2 Carrying heavy loads on the shoulder.
Deformity: Winging of the scapula, i.e. excessive
prominence of the medial border of the scapula.
Normally, the pull of the muscle keeps the medial
border against the thoracic wall.
Disability:
• Loss of pushing and punching actions. During
attempts at pushing, there occurs winging of the
scapula (see Fig. 2.12).
• Overhead abduction of shoulder girdle is partly
affected due to intact trapezius muslce.
Fig. 4.18: Ptosis due to Horner’s syndrome
Fig. 4.17: Complete claw hand
Fig. 4.16: Erb’s paralysis of right arm
Mnemonics
Brachial plexus: Branches of posterior cord
STAR:
Subscapular (upper and lower)
Thoracodorsal
Axillary
Radial
Axillary artery branches “Slap The Lawyer
Save A Patient”:
1st part gives 1 branch; 2nd part 2 branches; and
3rd part 3 branches.
--- Page 87 ---
UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
Superior thoracic branch of 1st part
Thoracoacromial branch of 2nd part
Lateral thoracic branch of 2nd part
Subscapular branch of 3rd part
Anterior circumflex humeral branch of 3rd part
Posterior circumflex humeral branch of 3rd part
Thoracoacromial artery branches “ABCD”:
Acromial
Breast (pectoral)
Clavicular
Deltoid
Brachial plexus branches: “My Aunt Ragged My Uncle”:
From lateral to medial:
• Musculocutaneous
• Axillary
• Radial
• Median
• Ulnar
Brachial plexus “Ramu Tailor Drinks Cold Beer”:
Roots (ventral rami) C5–T1
Trunks (upper, middle, lower)
Divisions (3 anterior and 3 posterior)
Cords (lateral, posterior, medial)
Branches
Median nerve: Recognizing it in an opened axilla
The Median nerve is the Middle of a giant capital
"M" formed by the musculocutaneous and ulnar
nerves.
Pectoral nerves: Path of lateral versus medial
"Lateral Less, Medial More".
Lateral pectoral nerve only goes through Pectoralis
major, but Medial pectoral nerve goes through both
Pectoralis major and minor.
Serratus anterior: Innervation and action
"C5–C7 raise your arms up to heaven".
Long thoracic nerve roots (C5–C7) innervate
Serratus anterior.
Test C5–C7 roots clinically by ability to raise arm
past 90°.
FACTS TO REMEMBER
• Sternoaponeurotic part of pectoralis major twists
around the upper fibres of same muscle. Latissimus
dorsi twists around the teres major. Thus the
smooth anterior and posterior walls of the axilla
are formed.
• Infraclavicular part of brachial plexus lies in the
axilla.
• Apex of the axilla is known as cervicoaxillary canal
and gives passage to axillary vessels and lower part
of brachial plexus.
• Axillary sheath is derived from prevertebral fascia.
CLINICOANATOMICAL PROBLEM
A patient came with inability to: (i) abduct right
shoulder, (ii) flex elbow joint, and (iii) supinate the
forearm
• What is the site of injury of the nerves?
• What is the point called?
• What are the nerves affected?
Ans: The site of injury is called Erb’s point.
Six nerves are involved:
i. Ventral ramus of cervical five segment of
spinal cord
ii. Ventral ramus of cervical six segment of spinal
cord
These two rami join to form the upper trunk.
iii. Suprascapular nerve from upper trunk
iv. Nerve to subclavius from upper trunk
v. Anterior division of upper trunk
vi. Posterior division of upper trunk
These divisions give fibres to deltoid, brachialis,
biceps brachii, supinator, so the arm cannot be
abducted. The elbow is extended and forearm is
pronated. This paralysis is called Erb’s paralysis.
FURTHER READING
• Birch R. Surgical Disorders of the Peripheral Nerves, 2nd ed.
London: Springer-Verlag, 2011.
An account of the current state-of-the-art practice of diagnosis and
management of surgical lesions of the peripheral nerves, including
the brachial plexus.
• Kuntz A. Distribution of the sympathetic rami to the brachial
plexus: its relation to sympathectomy affecting the upper
extremity. Arch Surg 1927;15:871–77.
A description of the significant number of individuals in whom
the intrathoracic somatic branches from the second thoracic
spinal nerve join the first thoracic spinal nerve. These 'Kuntz's
nerves' join the lower part of the brachial plexus without passing
through the stellate ganglion, explaining the incomplete
sympathetic blockade of the upper extremities in stellate
ganglion blockade.
1–7 From Medical Council of India, Competency based Undergraduate Curriculum for the Indian Medical Graduate, 2018;1:44–80.
--- Page 88 ---
AXILLA
Upper Limb
Section 1
1. Describe the axillary artery under following
headings: Beginning, course and branches. Add a
note on anastomoses around scapula.
2. Enumerate the roots, trunks, cords, divisions and
branches of brachial plexus.
3. Write short notes/enumerate:
a. Boundaries of axilla
b. Areas draining into axillary lymph nodes
c. Branches of posterior cord of brachial plexus
d. Erb’s paralysis
e. Klumpke’s paralysis
1. Which of the following is not a branch of posterior
cord of brachial plexus?
a. Upper subscapular
b. Lower subscapular
c. Suprascapular
d. Axillary
2. Porter’s tip or policeman’s tip deformity occurs due
a. Klumpke’s paralysis
b. Paralysis of median nerve
c. Paralysis of radial nerve
d. Erb’s paralysis
3. Which is not a branch of lateral cord of brachial
plexus?
a. Musculocutaneous
b. Lateral root of median
c. Medial root of median
d. Lateral pectoral
4. Erb’s paralysis causes weakness of all muscles,
except:
a. Supraspinatus
b. Deltoid
c. Biceps brachii
d. Triceps brachii
5. Posterior wall of axilla is formed by all muscles,
except:
a. Teres major
b. Teres minor
c. Latissimus dorsi
d. Subscapularis
• Name the muscles forming posterior wall of axilla.
Which nerves supply these muscles.
• What are the boundaries of cervicoaxillary canal?
• Which muscle divides the axillary artery into 3 parts?
• What is the relation of the cords of brachial plexus
to the 1st and 2nd parts of axillary artery?
• Name the branches of axillary artery.
• Which is the largest branch of axillary artery?
• Name the lymph nodes in the axilla.
• Which nerves form the brachial plexus?
• Which sympathetic ganglia give sympathetic fibers
to the roots of brachial plexus?
• Name the branches from roots of BP (brachial
plexus).
• Name the branches of lateral cord of BP.
• Name the branches of medial cord of BP.
• Name the branches of posterior cord of BP.
• Which is the thickest branch of brachial plexus?
• What is Erb’s point?
• What is the disability in Erb’s paralysis?
• What is the disability in Klumpke’s paralysis?
• What is Bell’s paralysis? How does one test this
paralysis?
1. c
2. d
3. c
4. d
5. b
--- Page 89 ---
Fig. 5.1: Surface landmarks and lines of dissection
INTRODUCTION
This chapter deals mainly with structures which
connect the upper limb with the back of the trunk.
SURFACE LANDMARKS
1 The scapula (shoulder blade) is placed on the
posterolateral aspect of the upper part of the thorax.
It extends from the second to seventh ribs. Although
it is thickly covered by muscles, most of its outline
can be felt in the living subject. The acromion process
lies at the top of the shoulder. The crest of the spine of
the scapula runs from the acromion process medially
and slightly downwards to the medial border of the
scapula. The medial border and the inferior angle of the
scapula can also be palpated (Fig. 5.1).
2 The eighth rib is just below the inferior angle of the
scapula. The lower ribs can be identified on the back
by counting down from the eighth rib.
3 The iliac crest is a curved bony ridge lying below the
waist. The anterior end of the crest is the anterior
superior iliac spine. The posterior superior iliac spine is
felt in a shallow dimple above the buttock, about
5 cm from the median plane.
4 The sacrum lies between the right and left dimples
mentioned above. Usually three sacral spines are
palpable in the median plane.
5 The coccyx lies between the two buttocks in the
median plane.
6 The spine of the seventh cervical vertebra or vertebra
prominens is readily felt at the root of the neck. Higher
up on the back of the neck, the second cervical spine
can be felt about 5 cm below the external occipital
protuberance. Other spines that can be recognised are
T3 at the level of root of the spine of the scapula, L4
at the level of the highest point of the iliac crest, and
S2 at the level of the posterior superior iliac spine.
Back
A little learning is a dangerous thing
—Alexander Pope
7 The junction of the back of the head with that of the
neck is indicated by the external occipital
protuberance and the superior nuchal lines. The
external occipital protuberance is a bony projection felt
in the median plane on the back of the head at the
upper end of the nuchal furrow (running vertically
on the back of the neck). The superior nuchal lines are
indistinct curved ridges which extend on either side
from the protuberance to the mastoid process. The
nuchal furrow extends to the external occipital
protuberance above and to the spine of C7 below.
--- Page 90 ---
BACK
Upper Limb
Section 1
SKIN AND FASCIAE OF THE BACK
Position
Human being mostly lies on his back. Therefore, the
skin and fasciae of the back are adapted to sustain
pressure of the body weight. Accordingly, the skin is
thick and fixed to the underlying fasciae; the superficial
fascia containing variable amount of fat, is thick and
strong and is connected to overlying skin by connective
tissue; and the deep fascia is dense in texture.
Cutaneous Nerves
The cutaneous nerves of the back are derived from the
posterior primary rami of the spinal nerves. Their
distribution extends up to the posterior axillary lines.
The following points may be noted.
1 The posterior primary rami of the spinal nerves C1,
C7, C8, and L4, 5 do not give off any cutaneous
branches. All twelve thoracic, L1–3 and five
sacral nerves, however, give cutaneous branches.
2 Each posterior/dorsal primary ramus divides into
medial and lateral branches, both of which supply
the erector spinae muscles, but only one of them,
either medial or lateral, continues to become the
cutaneous nerves. In the upper half of the body (up
to T6), the medial branches, and in the lower half of
the body (below T6) the lateral branches, of the
posterior primary rami provide the cutaneous
branches. Each cutaneous nerve divides into a
smaller medial and a larger lateral branch before
supplying the skin (Fig. 5.2).
3 The posterior primary rami supply the intrinsic
muscles of the back and the skin covering them. The
cutaneous distribution extends further laterally than
the extensor muscles.
4 No posterior primary ramus ever supplies skin or
muscles of a limb. The cutaneous branches of the
posterior primary rami of nerves L1, 2, 3 and
S1–3 are exceptions in this respect: They turn
downwards unlike any other nerve and supply the
skin of the gluteal region.
DISSECTION
Identify the external occipital protuberance (i) of the skull.
Draw a line in the midline from the protuberance to the
spine of the last thoracic (T12) vertebra (ii). Make incision
along this line (Fig. 5.1). Extend the incision from its lower
end to the deltoid tuberosity (iii) on the humerus which is
present on lateral surface about the middle of the arm.
Note that the arm is placed by the side of the trunk.
Make another incision along a horizontal line from
seventh cervical spine—vertebra prominens (iv) to the
acromion process of scapula (v). Reflect the skin flap
laterally.
Fig. 5.2: Typical thoracic spinal nerve. The ventral primary ramus is the intercostal nerve
--- Page 91 ---
UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
Competency achievement: The student should be able to:
AN 10.8 Describe, identify and demonstrate the position,
attachment, nerve supply and actions of trapezius and latissimus
dorsi.1
MUSCLES CONNECTING THE UPPER LIMB
WITH THE VERTEBRAL COLUMN
Features
Muscles connecting the upper limb with the vertebral
column are the trapezius (Figs 5.3a and b), the
latissimus dorsi, the levator scapulae, and the rhomboid
minor and rhomboid major. The attachments of these
muscles are given in Table 5.1, and their nerve supply
and actions are shown in Table 5.2.
DISSECTION
Identify the attachments of trapezius muscle in the upper
part of back; and that of latissimus dorsi in the lower
part. Cut vertically through trapezius 5 cm lateral to the
vertebral spines. Divide the muscle horizontally between
the clavicle and spine of scapula; and reflect it laterally
to identify the accessory nerve and its accompanying
blood vessels, the superficial branch of transverse
cervical artery and vein (refer to BDC App).
Look for the suprascapular vessels and nerve, deep
to trapezius muscle, towards the scapular notch.
Cut through levator scapulae muscle midway
between its two attachments and clean the dorsal
scapular nerve (supplying the rhomboids) and
accompanying blood vessels. Identify rhomboid minor
from rhomboid major muscle.
Pull the medial or inner scapular border away from
the chest wall for looking at the serratus anterior
muscle.
Define attachments of latissimus dorsi muscle.
Fig. 5.3a: The trapezius muscle and latissimus dorsi
Fig. 5.3b: Dissection of the back showing superficial muscles
--- Page 92 ---
BACK
Upper Limb
Section 1
Table 5.1: Attachments of muscles connecting the upper limb to the vertebral column (Figs 5.4 and 5.6)
Muscle
Origin
Insertion
Trapezius
• Medial one-third of superior nuchal line
• Upper fibres into the posterior border of
The right and left muscles
• External occipital protuberance
lateral one-third of clavicle
together form a trapezium that
• Ligamentum nuchae
• Middle fibres into the medial margin of
covers the upper half of the back
• C7 spine
the acromion process and upper lip of the
(Figs 5.3a and b)
• T1–T12 spines
crest of spine of the scapula
• Corresponding supraspinous ligaments
• Lower fibres on the apex of triangular
area at the medial end of the spine, with
a bursa intervening
Latissimus dorsi
• Posterior one-third of the outer lip of
The muscle winds round the lower
It covers a large area of
iliac crest
border of the teres major, and forms the
the lower back, and is
• Posterior layer of lumbar fascia; thus
posterior fold of the axilla
overlapped by the trapezius
attaching the muscle to the lumbar and
The tendon is twisted upside down and is
(Figs 5.3a and 5.4)
sacral spines
inserted into floor of the intertubercular
• Spines of T7–T12, lower four ribs
sulcus
• Inferior angle of the scapula
Levator scapulae
• Transverse processes of C1, C2
Superior angle and upper part of medial
(Fig. 5.4)
• Posterior tubercles of the transverse
border (up to triangular area) of the scapula
processes of C3, C4
Rhomboid minor (Fig. 5.4)
• Lower part of ligamentum nuchae
Base of the triangular area at the root of the
• Spines C7 and T1
spine of the scapula
Rhomboid major (Fig. 5.4)
• Spines of T2–T5
Medial border of scapula below the root of
• Supraspinous ligaments
the spine
Table 5.2: Nerve supply and actions of muscles connecting the upper limb to the vertebral column
Muscle
Nerve supply
Actions
Trapezius
• Spinal part of accessory nerve (XI)
• Upper fibres act with levator scapulae, and elevate
• Branches from C3, C4 (proprioceptive)
the scapula, as in shrugging. Upper fibres of both sides
extend the neck
• Middle fibres act with rhomboids, and retract the
scapula
• Upper and lower fibres act with serratus anterior, and
rotate the scapula forwards around the chest wall thus
playing an important role in abduction of the arm
beyond 90o (Fig. 5.7)
• Steadies the scapula
Latissimus dorsi
Thoracodorsal nerve (C6–C8)
• Adduction, extension, and medial rotation of the
(nerve to latissimus dorsi)
shoulder as in swimming, rowing, climbing, pulling,
folding the arm behind the back, and scratching the
opposite scapula
• Helps in violent expiratory effort like coughing, sneezing,
etc.
• Essentially a climbing muscle
• Hold inferior angle of the scapula in place
Levator scapulae
• A branch from dorsal scapular nerve (C5)
• Helps in elevation of scapula
• Branches from C3, C4
• Steadies the scapula during movements of the arm
Rhomboid minor
Dorsal scapular nerve (C5)
• Retraction of scapula
Rhomboid major
Dorsal scapular nerve (C5)
• Retraction of scapula
--- Page 93 ---
UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
Fig. 5.5: Some of the structures under cover of the right
trapezius muscle
Fig. 5.4: The latissimus dorsi, the levator scapulae, the
rhomboid minor and the rhomboid major muscles
ADDITIONAL FEATURES OF MUSCLES OF THE BACK
Trapezius
1 Developmentally, the trapezius is related to the
sternocleidomastoid. Both of them develop from
branchial arch mesoderm and are supplied by the
spinal accessory nerve.
2 The principal action of the trapezius is to rotate the
scapula during abduction of the arm beyond 90°.
Clinically, the muscle is tested by asking the patient
to shrug his shoulder against resistance.
Structures under Cover of the Trapezius
A large number of structures lies immediately under
cover of the trapezius. Some of them are shown in
Figs 5.5 and 5.6 and are listed below.
A. Muscles
1 Semispinalis capitis
2 Splenius capitis
3 Levator scapulae (Fig. 5.4)
4 Inferior belly of omohyoid
5 Rhomboid minor
6 Rhomboid major
7 Supraspinatus
8 Infraspinatus
9 Latissimus dorsi
10 Serratus posterior superior
B. Vessels
1 Suprascapular artery and vein
2 Superficial branch of the transverse cervical
artery (superficial cervical) (Fig. 5.5) and
accompanying veins
3 Deep branch of transverse cervical artery (Fig. 5.6)
(dorsal scapular) and accompanying veins
C. Nerves
1 Spinal root of accessory nerve (Fig. 5.5)
2 Suprascapular nerve
3 C3, C4 nerves
4 Posterior primary rami of C2–C6 and T1–T12
pierce the muscle to become cutaneous nerves.
D.Bursa: A bursa lies over the smooth triangular area
at the root of the spine of the scapula.
Latissimus Dorsi
1 This is the only muscle which connects the pelvic
girdle and vertebral column to upper limb. It
possesses extensive origin and narrow insertion.
--- Page 94 ---
BACK
Upper Limb
Section 1
lateral border of the latissimus dorsi, laterally by the
posterior border of the external oblique muscle of the
abdomen, and inferiorly by the iliac crest (which forms
the base). The occasional hernia at this site is called
lumbar hernia (Fig. 5.4).
After completing the dissection of the back, the limb
with clavicle and scapula is detached from the trunk.
DISSECTION
For detachment of the limb, muscles which need to be
incised are trapezius, levator scapulae, rhomboid minor
and major, serratus anterior, latissimus dorsi and
sternocleidomastoid.
The sternoclavicular joint is opened to free clavicle
from the sternum. Upper limb with clavicle and scapula
is removed en bloc.
FACTS TO REMEMBER
• Trapezius is a shrugging muscle supplied by spinal
root of XI nerve.
• Trapezius and serratus anterior cause 90°–180° of
abduction at shoulder joints.
CLINICOANATOMICAL PROBLEM
A poor young adult felt multiple nodules in the
region of his neck above the clavicle. A lymph node
biopsy was advised from right side of his neck. A
few days after the biopsy he was unable to shrug his
right shoulder
• Why was the biopsy advised?
• Why is he not able to shrug his shoulder?
Fig. 5.7: Rotation of the scapula during abduction of the arm
beyond 90°, brought about by the trapezius and the serratus
anterior muscles
2 The latissimus dorsi develops in the extensor
compartment of the limb. Thereafter, it migrates to
its wide attachment on the trunk, taking its nerve
supply (thoracodorsal nerve) along with it (latus =
wide). It is also called a swimmer’s muscle.
3 The latissimus dorsi is tested clinically by feeling the
contracting muscle in the posterior fold of the axilla
after asking the patient to cough.
Competency achievement: The student should be able to:
AN 10.9 Describe the arterial anastomosis around the scapula and
mention the boundaries of triangle of auscultation.2
Triangle of Auscultation
Triangle of auscultation is a small triangular interval
bounded medially by the lateral border of the trapezius,
laterally by the medial border of the scapula, and
inferiorly by the upper border of the latissimus dorsi.
The floor of the triangle is formed by the 6th and 7th
rib, and 6th intercostal space (ICS), and the rhomboid
major. This is the only part of the back which is not
covered by big muscles. Respiratory sounds of apex of
lower lobe heard through a stethoscope are better heard
over this triangle on each side. On the left side, the
cardiac orifice of the stomach lies deep to the triangle,
and in days before X-rays were discovered, the sounds
of swallowed liquids were auscultated over this triangle
to confirm the oesophageal tumour (Fig. 5.3a).
Lumbar Triangle of Petit
Lumbar triangle of Petit is another small triangle
surrounded by muscles. It is bounded medially by the
Fig. 5.6: Transverse section showing the arrangement of
structures on the back
--- Page 95 ---
UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
FURTHER READING
• Mehra L, Tuli A, Raheja S. Dorsoscapularis triangularis:
Embryological and phylogenetic characterization of a rare
variation of Trapezius. Anatomy and Cell Biology 2016;
49(1):68–72.
Ans: For proper diagnosis and treatment, a lymph
node biopsy was advised from the posterior triangle
of neck. The spinal root of accessory nerve got injured
during the biopsy procedure. This nerve supplies
trapezius muscle, responsible for shrugging of the
shoulder. Due to the injury to spinal root of XI nerve,
he is unable to shrug his shoulder.
1. Describe trapezius muscle under following
headings:
a. Origin
b. Insertion
c. Nerve supply
d. Actions
• Mark the insertion of trapezius on the scapula.
• Name structures under cover of trapezius.
• Give the attachments of latissimus dorsi muscle.
• What are the nerves supplying trapezius?
• What is the action of rhomboid major and minor
muscles?
• Give the boundaries of triangle of auscultation.
• Give the boundaries of lumbar triangle of Petit.
2. Enumerate structures under cover of trapezius.
3. Describe latissimus dorsi under following headings:
a. Origin
b. Insertion
c. Nerve supply
d. Actions
1. Boundaries of triangle of auscultation are not
formed by one of the following structures:
a. Lateral border of trapezius
b. Medial border of scapula
c. Upper border of latissimus dorsi
d. Upper border of teres major
2. Boundaries of lumbar triangle of Petit are formed
by all, except:
a. Lateral border of latissimus dorsi
b. Posterior border of external oblique muscle of
abdomen
c. Iliac crest
d. Quadratus lumborum
3. Trapezius is not attached to:
a. Clavicle
b. First rib
c. Occiput
d. Scapula
4. Posterior primary rami of one of the following
nerves give cutaneous branch:
a. C1
b. C7, C8
c. L4, 5
d. S1
5. Which structure does not lie just deep to trapezius?
a. Spinal accessory nerve
b. Superficial branch of transverse cervical artery
c. Deep branch of transverse cervical artery
d. C3 and C4 nerves
1. d
2. d
3. b
4. d
5. c
1–2 From Medical Council of India, Competency based Undergraduate Curriculum for the Indian Medical Graduate, 2018;1:44–80.
--- Page 96 ---
Scapular Region
Action speaks louder than words
—English Proverb
INTRODUCTION
The shoulder or scapular region comprises structures
which are closely related to and surround the shoulder
joint. For a proper understanding of the region, revise
some features of the scapula and the upper end of the
humerus.
SURFACE LANDMARKS
1 a. The upper half of the humerus is covered on its
anterior, lateral and posterior aspects by the deltoid
muscle. This muscle is triangular in shape and
forms the rounded contour of the shoulder (Fig. 6.1).
b. The greater tubercle of the humerus forms the
most lateral bony point of the shoulder.
2 The skin covering the shoulder region is supplied by:
a. The lateral supraclavicular nerve, over the upper
half of the deltoid
b. The upper lateral cutaneous nerve of the arm, over
the lower half of the deltoid
c. The dorsal rami of the upper thoracic nerves, over
the back, i.e. over the scapula.
3 The superficial fascia contains (in addition to some fat
and cutaneous nerves) the inferolateral part of the
platysma arising from the deltoid fascia.
4 The deep fascia covering the deltoid sends numerous
septa between its fasciculi. The subscapularis,
supraspinatus and infraspinatus fasciae provide
origin to a part of the respective muscle.
MUSCLES OF THE SCAPULAR REGION
Features
Muscles of scapular region are the deltoid (Fig. 6.2), the
supraspinatus, the infraspinatus, the teres minor, the sub-
scapularis, and the teres major. The other muscles are
described in Tables 6.1 and 6.2. The deltoid is described
below.
Competency achievement: The student should be able to:
AN 10.10 Describe and identify the deltoid and rotator cuff muscles.1
DELTOID (DELTA LIKE OR TRIANGULAR)
Origin with Features
1 The anterior border and adjoining surface of the
lateral one-third of the clavicle (Fig. 6.2).
2 The lateral border of the acromion process where
four septa of origin are attached (Fig. 6.2).
3 Lower lip of the crest of the spine of the scapula.
Fig. 6.1: Surface landmarks: Shoulder, arm and elbow regions
--- Page 97 ---
UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
Figs 6.2a and b: The origin and insertion of the deltoid muscle
Table 6.2: Nerve supply and actions of muscles of scapular region (except deltoid)
Muscle
Nerve supply
Actions
1. Supraspinatus
Suprascapular nerve (C5, C6)
• Along with other short scapular muscles, it steadies the
(Fig. 6.3)
head of the humerus during movements of the arm. Its action
as abductor of shoulder joint from 0°–15° is controversial.
Both supraspinatus and deltoid are involved in initiation of
abduction and continuation of abduction.
2. Infraspinatus
Suprascapular nerve (C5, C6)
• Lateral rotator of arm (at shoulder joint)
3. Teres minor
Axillary nerve (C5, C6)
Same as infraspinatus
4. Subscapularis
Upper and lower subscapular nerves
Medial rotator and adductor of arm
(Fig. 6.4)
(C5, C6)
5. Teres major
Lower subscapular nerve (C5, C6)
Medial rotator, adductor and extensor of arm
Table 6.1: Attachments of muscles of scapular region (except deltoid)
Muscle
Origin
Insertion
1. Supraspinatus
Medial two-thirds of the supraspinous fossa
Upper impression on the greater tubercle
(Fig. 6.3)
of the scapula. The muscle passes as a tendon of the humerus
laterally beneath coracoacromial arch to blend
with the capsule of shoulder joint.
The tendon is separated from the arch by the
subacromial bursa (Fig. 6.7).
2. Infraspinatus
Medial two-thirds of the infraspinous fossa
Middle impression on the greater
of the scapula
tubercle of the humerus
3. Teres minor
Upper two-thirds of the dorsal surface of the
Lowest impression on the greater
lateral border of the scapula as 2 slips
tubercle of the humerus
4. Subscapularis (multipennate)
Medial two-thirds of the subscapular fossa
Lesser tubercle of the humerus
(Fig. 6.4)
5. Teres major
Lower one-third of the dorsal surface of lateral
Medial lip of the bicipital groove of the
border and inferior angle of the scapula
humerus (see Fig. 4.4)
--- Page 98 ---
SCAPULAR REGION
Upper Limb
Section 1
Vessels
i. Anterior circumflex humeral
ii. Posterior circumflex humeral (Fig. 6.6)
Nerve
Axillary (Fig. 6.6).
Joints and Ligaments
i. Shoulder joint
ii. Musculotendinous cuff of the shoulder (Fig. 6.7).
iii. Coracoacromial ligament.
Bursae
Subscapular, infraspinatus bursae around the shoulder
joint, including the subacromial or subdeltoid bursa
(Fig. 6.8).
The acromial part of deltoid is an example of a
multipennate muscle. Many fibres arise from four septa
of origin that are attached above to the acromion process.
The fibres converge onto three septa of insertion which
are attached to the deltoid tuberosity (Fig. 6.2).
Insertion
The deltoid tuberosity of the humerus where three septa
of insertion are attached.
Nerve Supply
Axillary nerve (C5, C6).
Actions
1 The multipennate acromial fibres are powerful
abductors of the arm at the shoulder joint from
beginning to 90°.
A multipennate arrangement allows a large
number of muscle fibres to be packed into a relatively
small volume. As the strength of contraction of a
muscle is proportional to the number of muscle fibres
present in it (and not on their length), a multipennate
muscle is much stronger than other muscles having
the same volume.
2 The anterior fibres are flexors and medial rotators of
the arm.
3 The posterior fibres are extensors and lateral rotators
of the arm.
Structures under Cover of the Deltoid
Bones
i. The upper end of the humerus
ii. The coracoid process
Muscles
Insertions of
i. Pectoralis minor on coracoid process.
ii. Supraspinatus, infraspinatus, and teres minor (on
the greater tubercle of the humerus) (Fig. 6.3).
iii. Subscapularis on lesser tubercle of humerus (Fig. 6.4).
iv. Pectoralis major, teres major and latissimus dorsi
on the intertubercular sulcus of the humerus
(Fig. 6.5).
Origin of
i. Coracobrachialis and short head of biceps brachii
from the coracoid process (Fig. 6.5).
ii. Long head of the biceps brachii from the supra-
glenoid tubercle.
iii. Long head of the triceps brachii from the infra-
glenoid tubercle.
iv. The lateral head of the triceps brachii from the upper
part of posterior surface of the humerus.
Fig. 6.3: The origins and insertions of the supraspinatus,
infraspinatus and teres minor muscles of right side
Fig. 6.4: The subscapularis muscle
--- Page 99 ---
UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
DISSECTION
Define the margins of the deltoid muscle covering the
shoulder joint region. Reflect the part of the muscle
arising from spine of scapula downwards. Separate the
infraspinatus muscle from teres major and minor
muscles which run from the lateral scapular border
towards humerus. Axillary nerve accompanied with
posterior circumflex humeral vessels lies on the deep
aspect of the deltoid muscle (refer to BDC App).
Competency achievement: The student should be able to:
AN 10.13 Explain anatomical basis of injury to axillary nerve during
intramuscular injections.2
Fig. 6.7: Subacromial bursa in sagittal section, with the
musculotendinous cuff of the shoulder
Fig. 6.5: Horizontal section of the deltoid region showing arrangement of the muscles in and around the bicipital groove
Fig. 6.6: Horizontal section of the deltoid region showing the axillary nerve and vessels around the surgical neck of humerus
--- Page 100 ---
SCAPULAR REGION
Upper Limb
Section 1
Fig. 6.8: The subacromial bursa as seen in coronal section
CLINICAL ANATOMY
• Intramuscular injections are often given into
the deltoid. They should be given in the middle
of the muscle to avoid injury to the axillary nerve
(Fig. 6.9a). If injection is given in upper part of
deltoid, axillary nerve may be damaged.
• The deltoid muscle is tested by asking the patient
to abduct the arm against resistance applied with
one hand, and feeling for the contracting muscle
with the other hand (Fig. 6.9b).
• The axillary nerve may be damaged by disloca-
tion of the shoulder or by the fracture of the surgical
neck of the humerus. The effects produced are:
a. Rounded contour of shoulder is lost; greater
tubercle of humerus becomes prominent
(Fig. 6.10a).
b. Deltoid is paralysed, with loss of the power of
abduction up to 90° at the shoulder.
Figs 6.10a and b: (a) Normal rounded contour is lost on the right side. Inset shows normal contour, and (b) the sensory loss (regimental badge)
Figs 6.9a and b: (a) Intramuscular injection being given in deltoid muscle, and (b) deltoid muscle being tested
--- Page 101 ---
UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
c. There is sensory loss over the lower half of the
deltoid in a badge-like area called regimental
badge (Fig. 6.10b).
• The tendon of the supraspinatus may undergo
degeneration. This can give rise to calcification and
even spontaneous rupture of the tendon.
• In subacromial bursitis, pressure over the deltoid
below the acromion process with the arm by the
side causes pain. However, when the arm is
abducted, pressure over the same point causes no
pain, because the bursa disappears under the
acromion process (Dawbarn’s sign). Subacromial
or subdeltoid bursitis is usually secondary to
inflammation of the supraspinatus tendon.
Competency achievement: The student should be able to:
AN 10.10 Describe and identify the deltoid and rotator cuff muscles.3
Musculotendinous Cuff of the Shoulder or Rotator Cuff
Musculotendinous cuff of the shoulder is a fibrous
sheath formed by the four flattened tendons which blend
with the capsule of the shoulder joint and strengthen it.
The muscles which form the cuff arise from the scapula
and are inserted into the lesser and greater tubercles of
the humerus. They are the subscapularis, the
supraspinatus, the infraspinatus and the teres minor
(Fig. 6.7). Their tendons, while crossing the shoulder
joint, become flattened and blend with each other on one
hand, and with the capsule of the joint on the other hand,
before reaching their points of insertion.
The cuff gives strength to the capsule of the shoulder
joint all around except inferiorly. This explains why
dislocations of the humerus occur commonly in a
anteroinferior direction. Thus rotator cuff rests on
tuberosities, fused to the capsule, strengthens the
capsule and steadies head of humerus.
Subacromial Bursa
Subacromial bursa is the largest bursa of the body,
situated below the coracoacromial arch and the deltoid
muscle. Below the bursa, there are the tendon of the
supraspinatus and the greater tubercle of the humerus
(Fig. 6.8).
The subacromial bursa is of great value in the
abduction of the arm at the shoulder joint.
i. It protects the supraspinatus tendon against
friction with the acromion process.
ii. During overhead abduction, the greater tubercle
of the humerus passes under the acromion process;
this is facilitated by the presence of this bursa.
INTERMUSCULAR SPACES
INTRODUCTION
The long head of triceps brachii spans the length of the
arm arising from infraglenoid tubercle of scapula to the
olecranon process of ulna. It lies medial to humerus.
Teres minor crosses posterior aspect of the shoulder
joint and origin of the long head as it passes from its
origin from scapula to the humerus. The muscle is
replaced by subscapularis on the anterior aspect of
shoulder joint. Teres major also crosses the long head
as it runs to bicipital groove for its insertion.
Thus potential spaces are formed between lateral
border of scapula, medial aspect of humerus, long head
of triceps brachii, teres minor or subscapularis and teres
major muscles.
In the upper part, there is a quadrangular space
laterally and upper triangular space medially. In the
lower part is the lower triangular space. Their
boundaries are as follows.
Quadrangular Space
Boundaries
Superior:
i. Subscapularis in front.
ii. Capsule of the shoulder joint. This is the loose
inferior part of the capsule of the shoulder joint. In
anatomical position, the capsule lies in this space.
The capsule gets taut as it is used up during
abduction of the shoulder joint.
iii. Inferior border of teres minor behind.
Inferior: Superior border of teres major.
Medial: Lateral border of long head of the triceps brachii.
Lateral: Surgical neck of the humerus.
Contents
i. Axillary nerve (Fig. 6.11)
ii. Posterior circumflex humeral vessels
Upper Triangular Space
Boundaries
Superior: Inferior border of teres minor.
Lateral: Medial border of long head of the triceps brachii.
Inferior: Superior border of teres major.
Contents
Circumflex scapular artery. It interrupts the origin of
the teres minor and reaches the infraspinous fossa for
anastomoses with the suprascapular artery and deep
branch of transverse cervical artery.
--- Page 102 ---
SCAPULAR REGION
Upper Limb
Section 1
Lower Triangular Space
It is diagonally opposite the upper triangular space.
Boundaries
Medial: Lateral border of long head of the triceps brachii.
Lateral: Medial border of humerus.
Superior: Lower border of teres major (Fig. 6.11).
Contents
i. Radial nerve
ii. Profunda brachii vessels
DISSECTION
The quadrangular intermuscular space is a space in
between the scapular muscles. The quadrangular space
is bounded by teres minor above and teres major below;
by the long head of triceps muscle medially and the
surgical neck of humerus laterally. The axillary nerve
accompanied with posterior circumflex humeral vessels
lie in this space. Identify the nerve to the teres minor
muscle (Fig. 6.11) (refer to BDC App). Identify part of
the capsule of the shoulder joint.
Another intermuscular space, the upper triangular
space should be dissected. It is bounded by the teres
minor muscle medially, long head of triceps laterally,
and teres major muscle below.
Now the remaining two-thirds of deltoid muscle can
be reflected towards its insertion. Identify subscapularis
muscle anteriorly.
Define the attachments of infraspinatus and cut
muscle at the neck of scapula and reflect it on both sides.
Look for the structures covered with deltoid muscle.
Identify a lower triangular space which is bounded
above by the lower border of teres major muscle,
medially by the long head of triceps brachii and laterally
by the medial border of humerus. The radial nerve and
profunda brachii vessels pass through the space.
Dissect and identify the arteries taking part in the
anastomoses around scapula. These are suprascapular
along upper border, deep branch of transverse cervical
(dorsal scapular) along medial border and circumflex
scapular along lateral border of scapula (Fig. 6.12).
Competency achievement: The student should be able to:
AN 10.13 Explain anatomical basis of injury to axillary nerve during
intramuscular injections.4
AXILLARY OR CIRCUMFLEX NERVE
Axillary or circumflex nerve is an important nerve
because it supplies the deltoid muscle which is the
main abductor of the arm. Surgically, it is important,
because it is commonly involved in dislocations of the
shoulder and in fractures of the surgical neck of the
humerus.
The axillary nerve is a smaller terminal branch of
the posterior cord of the brachial plexus (C5, C6).
Root value: Its root value is ventral rami of cervical
5, 6 segments of spinal cord (see Fig. 4.14).
Fig. 6.11: The intermuscular spaces in the scapular region, including the quadrangular, upper triangular and lower triangular spaces
--- Page 103 ---
UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
Course
Axillary nerve courses through lower part of axilla into
the quadrangular space where it terminates by dividing
into two branches (Fig. 6.6).
Relations and Branches
a. In the lower part of the axilla, the nerve runs
downwards behind the third part of the axillary
artery. Here it lies on the subscapularis muscle. It is
related medially to the radial nerve, and laterally to
the coracobrachialis (see Fig. 4.9).
The nerve leaves the axilla by winding round the
lower border of the subscapularis in close relation
to the lowest part of the capsule of the shoulder joint
where it gives a branch to the capsule of the joint
and enters the quadrangular space (Fig. 6.8).
b. The nerve then passes backwards through the
quadrangular space. Here it is accompanied by the
posterior circumflex humeral vessels and has the
following relations (Fig. 6.11).
• Superiorly:
i. Subscapularis anteriorly or teres minor
posteriorly.
ii. Lowest part of the capsule of the shoulder
joint.
• Laterally: Surgical neck of humerus.
• Inferiorly: Teres major.
• Medially: Long head of the triceps brachii.
In the quadrangular space, the nerve divides into
anterior and posterior branches (Fig. 6.6).
c. The anterior branch is accompanied by the posterior
circumflex humeral vessels. It winds around the
surgical neck of the humerus, deep to the deltoid
muscle supplying the deltoid and the skin over its
anteroinferior part.
d. The posterior branch supplies the teres minor and the
posterior part of the deltoid. The nerve to the teres
minor bears a pseudoganglion, i.e. fibrous tissue and
fat without any neurons (Fig. 6.6). The posterior
branch then pierces the deep fascia at the lower part
of the posterior border of the deltoid and continues
as the upper lateral cutaneous nerve of the arm.
Its clinical anatomy has been given on p-77.
Competency achievement: The student should be able to:
AN 10.9 Describe the arterial anastomosis around the scapula and
mention the boundaries of triangle of auscultation.5
ANASTOMOSES AROUND SCAPULA
Anastomosis Around the Body of the Scapula
The anastomosis occurs in the three fossae—subscap-
ular, supraspinous and infraspinous. It is formed by:
a. The suprascapular artery, a branch of the thyro-
cervical trunk (Fig. 6.12).
b. The deep branch of the transverse cervical artery,
another branch of the thyrocervical trunk.
c. The circumflex scapular artery, a branch of the
subscapular artery which arises from the third part
of the axillary artery.
Fig. 6.12: Anastomoses around the scapula (dorsal aspect)
--- Page 104 ---
SCAPULAR REGION
Upper Limb
Section 1
Note that it is the anastomosis between branches of
the first part of the subclavian artery and the branches
of the third part of the axillary artery. These arteries
also anastomose with intercostal arteries.
Anastomosis Over the Acromion Process
It is formed by:
a. The acromial branch of the thoracoacromial artery
(2nd part of axillary).
b. The acromial branch of the suprascapular artery (1st
part of subclavian).
c. The acromial branch of the posterior circumflex
humeral artery (3rd part of axillary).
Note that this is the anastomosis between the first
part of the subclavian artery and the branches of the
second and third parts of the axillary artery (Fig. 6.12).
Competency achievement: The student should be able to:
AN 10.13 Explain anatomical basis of injury to axillary nerve during
intramuscular injections.6
CLINICAL ANATOMY
The arterial anastomoses provide a collateral
circulation through which blood can flow to the limb
when the distal part of the subclavian artery, or the
proximal part of the axillary artery is blocked
(Fig. 6.12).
Fracture of middle one-third of humerus causes
injury to radial nerve as it lies in lower triangular
space. This results in ‘wrist drop’.
Mnemonics
Suprascapular nerve and artery
Army (artery) goes over the bridge
Navy (nerve) goes under the bridge
Artery—suprascapular
Nerve—suprascapular
Bridge—superior transverse scapular ligament.
Rotator cuff muscles
The SITS muscles
Clockwise from top
Supraspinatus
Infraspinatus
Teres minor
Subscapularis
FACTS TO REMEMBER
• Branches of axillary nerve with accompanying
blood vessels pass through the quadrangular inter-
muscular space.
• Loose fold of capsule of shoulder joint forms upper
boundary of the quadrangular intermuscular space.
• Radial nerve and profunda brachii vessels course
through the lower triangular intermuscular space.
• Only circumflex scapular vessels pass through the
upper triangular space.
• Long head of triceps brachii is placed between
quadrangular and upper triangular spaces. Lower
down it forms a boundary of lower triangular
space.
CLINICOANATOMICAL PROBLEM
A patient came with injury on left shoulder region
after an accident. He was not able to abduct his
shoulder joint.
• Which nerve is injured?
• Where is the sensory loss?
Ans: Due to the injury to the surgical neck of
humerus, the axillary nerve got damaged. Patient
feels inability to abduct the shoulder joint.
The sensory loss is over the lower half of deltoid
muscle and is called regimental-badge area due to
injury to upper lateral cutaneous nerve of the arm, a
branch of the axillary nerve.
FURTHER READING
• Hertel R, lambert SM, Ballmer FT. The deltoid extension lag
sign for diagnosis and grading of axillary nerve palsy. I
Shoulder Elbow Surg 1998;7:97–99.
A description of an example of the value of testing muscle capacity
by eccentric activity, a more sensitive clinical method of
determining weakness (i.e. decrement from normal without testing
against the power of the observer) than using resistance against a
load (concentric activity).
• Leijnse JNAL, Han S-H, Kwon YH. Morphology of deltoid
origin and end tendons—a generic model. J Anat 2008; 213:
733–42.
A description of the internal architecture of deltoid in relation to
the discrete functions of the parts of that muscle.
• Shabana S, Mrudula C. Anatomy of suprascapular notch,
suprascapular nerve entrapment and its clinical significance.
Advance research of multidisciplinary discovery 2018;25:12–
1–6 From Medical Council of India, Competency based Undergraduate Curriculum for the Indian Medical Graduate, 2018;1:44–80.
--- Page 105 ---
UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
• What type of fibres are the middle fibres of deltoid
muscle?
• Show the main action of deltoid muscle.
• Name the structures under cover of deltoid.
• Where is intramuscular injection given in deltoid and
why?
• Name the muscles forming rotator cuff of shoulder.
• Name the boundaries of quadrangular space and
give its contents.
• What structures lie in the lower triangular space?
• What does the word ‘profunda’ mean?
• Why is axillary nerve called circumflex nerve?
• Name muscles supplied by the axillary nerve.
• Name the arteries taking part in the anastomoses
around scapula.
• What is the clinical importance of the anastomoses
around scapula?
1. Skin of lateral side of arm is supplied by all, except:
a. Lateral supraclavicular nerve
b. Intermediate supraclavicular nerve
c. Upper lateral cutaneous nerve of arm
d. Lower lateral cutaneous nerve of arm
2. Which part of deltoid is multipennate?
a. Clavicular fibres
b. Acromial fibres
c. Fibres from spine of scapula
d. Whole of the muscle
3. Rotator cuff is formed by all, except:
a. Supraspinatus
b. Infraspinatus
c. Teres major
d. Subscapularis
4. Which of the following nerves has a pseudo-
ganglion?
a. Suprascapular nerve
b. Axillary nerve
c. Nerve to teres minor
d. Nerve to serratus anterior
1. Describe deltoid muscle under following headings:
a. Origin, insertion, action and nerve supply
b. Structures under cover of deltoid
c. Effect of paralysis of the muscle
2. Describe the boundaries and contents of
quadrangular, upper and lower triangular spaces.
3. Write short notes/enumerate:
a. Course and branches of axillary nerve
b. Anastomoses around the body of scapula
c. Anastomses over the acromion process
d. Musculotendinous cuff of shoulder/rotator cuff
5. Boundaries of quadrangular space are not formed by:
a. Teres minor
b. Long head of biceps brachii
c. Surgical neck of humerus
d. Teres major
6. Which is not a content of lower triangular space?
a. Profunda brachii artery
b. Radial nerve
c. Superior ulnar collateral artery
d. Profunda brachii vein
7. Anastomosis around body of scapula is between:
a. 1st part of subclavian artery and 3rd part of
axillary artery
b. 2nd part of subclavian artery and 2nd part of
axillary artery
c. 3rd part of subclavian artery and 3rd part of
axillary artery
d. 1st part of subclavian artery and 2nd part of
axillary artery
1. b
2. b
3. c
4. c
5. b
6. c
7. a
--- Page 106 ---
INTRODUCTION
The superficial fascia seen after the reflection of skin
contains cutaneous nerves, cutaneous or superficial
veins and lymphatics. The cutaneous nerves are the
continuation of the spinal nerves and carry sympathetic
fibres for supplying the sweat glands, arterioles in the
dermis and arrector pilorum muscles in relation to the
hair follicle. Thus, the effects of sympathetic on the skin
are sudomotor (increase sweat secretion); vasomotor
(narrow the arterioles of skin) and pilomotor (contract
arrector pilorum muscle to make the hair erect or
straight), respectively. The nerves also carry sensation
of pain, touch, temperature and pressure. Superficial
veins are seen along with the cutaneous nerves. These
are utilised for giving intravenous transfusions, cardiac
catheterisation and taking blood samples. Lymphatic
vessels though important are not easily seen in ordinary
dissection.
CUTANEOUS NERVES
Position
The skin of the upper limb is supplied by 15 sets of
cutaneous nerves (Table 7.1). Out of these, only one set
(supraclavicular) is derived from the cervical plexus,
and another nerve (intercostobrachial) is derived from
the second intercostal nerve. The remaining 13 sets are
derived from the brachial plexus through the
musculocutaneous, median, ulnar, axillary and radial
nerves. Some branches arise directly from the medial
cord of the plexus.
It should be noted as follows:
a. The areas of distribution of peripheral cutaneous
nerves do not necessarily correspond with those
of individual spinal segments (areas of the skin
supplied by individual spinal segments are called
Cutaneous Nerves, Superficial
Veins and Lymphatic Drainage
Eye, ear, nose and palpating fingers are the gems of a physician. An intact brain is the necklace
—Hippocrates
dermatomes). This is so because each cutaneous
nerve contains fibres from more than one ventral
ramus (of a spinal nerve); and each ramus gives
fibres to more than one cutaneous nerve.
b. Adjacent areas of skin supplied by different cuta-
neous nerves overlap each other to a considerable
extent. Therefore, the area of sensory loss after
damage to a nerve is much less than the area of
distribution of the nerve. The anaesthetic area is
surrounded by an area in which the sensations are
somewhat altered.
c. In both the upper and lower limbs, the nerves of
the anterior or flexor surface have a wider area of
distribution than those supplying the posterior or
extensor surface.
The individual cutaneous nerves, from above
downwards, are described below with their root values.
Figures 7.1a and b show the cutaneous nerves of the
upper limb.
1 The supraclavicular nerves (C3, C4) are branches
of the cervical plexus. They pierce the deep fascia
in the neck, descend superficial to the clavicle,
and supply:
a. The skin of the pectoral region up to the level
of the second rib.
b. Skin covering the upper half of the deltoid.
2 The upper lateral cutaneous nerve of the arm (C5, C6)
is the continuation of the posterior branch of the
axillary nerve. It supplies the skin covering the
lower half of the deltoid.
3 The lower lateral cutaneous nerve of the arm (C5, C6)
is a branch of the radial nerve given off in the
radial groove. It supplies the skin of the lower
half of the lateral side of the arm.
4 The intercostobrachial nerve (T2) is the lateral
cutaneous branch of the second intercostal nerve.
It crosses the axilla, and supplies the skin of the
--- Page 107 ---
UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
Table 7.1: The cutaneous nerves (Figs 7.1a and b)
Region supplied
Nerve(s)
Root value
Derived from
Upper part of pectoral region, and skin
Supraclavicular
C3, C4
Cervical plexus
over upper part of deltoid
1. Upper medial part
Intercostobrachial (Figs 7.1a and b)
2nd intercostal
2. Lower medial part
Medial cutaneous nerve of arm
T1, T2
Medial cord
3. Upper lateral part (including skin over
Upper lateral cutaneous nerve of arm
C5, C6
Axillary nerve
lower part of deltoid)
4. Lower lateral part
Lower lateral cutaneous nerve of arm
C5, C6
Radial nerve
5. Posterior aspect
Posterior cutaneous nerve of arm
Radial nerve
FOREARM
1. Medial side
Medial cutaneous nerve of forearm
C8, T1
Medial cord
2. Lateral side
Lateral cutaneous nerve of forearm
C5, C6
Musculocutaneous
3. Posterior side
Posterior cutaneous nerve of forearm
C6–C8
Radial nerve
PALM
1. Lateral two-thirds
Palmar cutaneous branch of median
C6, C7
Median
2. Medial one-third
Palmar cutaneous branch of ulnar
Ulnar
DORSUM OF HAND
1. Medial half including proximal and
Dorsal branch of ulnar
Ulnar
middle phalanges of medial 2½ digits
2. Lateral half including proximal and
Superficial terminal branch of radial
C6, C7
Radial
middle phalanges of lateral 2½ digits
DIGITS
Palmar aspect, and dorsal aspect of
distal phalanges
1. Lateral 3½ digits
Palmar digital branch of median
Median
2. Medial 1½ digits
Palmar digital branch of ulnar
C7, C8
Ulnar
upper half of the medial and posterior parts of
the arm. It lies amongst the central group of
axillary lymph nodes.
5 The medial cutaneous nerve of the arm (T1, T2) is
the smallest branch of the medial cord of the
brachial plexus.
6 The posterior cutaneous nerve of the arm (C5) is a
branch of the radial nerve given off in the axilla.
It supplies the skin of the back of the arm from
the insertion of the deltoid to the olecranon process.
7 The lateral cutaneous nerve of the forearm (C5, C6)
is the continuation of the musculocutaneous
nerve. It pierces the deep fascia just lateral to the
tendon of the biceps 2–3 cm above the bend of
the elbow, and supplies the skin of the lateral
side of the forearm, extending anteriorly to a
small part of the ball of the thumb.
8 The medial cutaneous nerve of the forearm
(C8, T1) is a branch of the medial cord of the
brachial plexus. It runs along the medial side of
the axillary and brachial arteries, and supplies
the skin of the medial side of the forearm.
9 The posterior cutaneous nerve of the forearm
(C6–C8) arises from the radial nerve, in the radial
groove. It descends posterior to the lateral
epicondyle and supplies the skin of the back of
the forearm.
10 The median nerve gives off two sets of cutaneous
branches in the hand.
a. The palmar cutaneous branch (C6–C8) arises a
short distance above the wrist, lies superficial to
flexor retinaculum and supplies skin over the
lateral two-thirds of the palm including that
over the thenar eminence (Fig. 7.1a).
b. Palmar digital branches (C6–C8) are five in
number and arise in the palm. The medial two
branches are common palmar digital nerves;
each divides near a digital cleft to form two
proper palmar digital nerves. The lateral three
branches are proper palmar digital nerves for
the medial and lateral sides of the thumb and
for the lateral side of the index finger. The
various digital branches of the median nerve
supply palmar skin of the lateral 3½ digits,
--- Page 108 ---
CUTANEOUS NERVES, SUPERFICIAL VEINS AND LYMPHATIC DRAINAGE
Upper Limb
Section 1
the nail beds, and skin on the dorsal aspect of
the distal phalanges of the same digits (Fig.
7.1b).
11 The ulnar nerve gives off three sets of cutaneous
nerves in hand.
a. The palmar cutaneous branch (C7, C8) arises in
the middle of the forearm and descends,
crossing superficial to flexor retinaculum and
supplies skin of the medial one-third of the
palm.
b. The palmar digital branches of the ulnar nerve (C7,
C8) are two in number. They arise from the
superficial terminal branch of the ulnar nerve
just distal to the pisiform bone. The medial of
the two branches is a proper palmar digital
nerve for the medial side of the little finger. The
lateral branch is a common palmar digital
nerve which divides into two proper digital
nerves for supply of adjacent sides of the ring
and little fingers. Thus it supplies skin of
medial 1½ digits, their nail beds and skin on
the dorsal aspects of distal phalanges of medial
1½ digits (Figs 7.1a and b).
c. The dorsal branch of the ulnar nerve
(C7, C8) arises about 5 cm above the wrist. It
descends with the main trunk of the ulnar
nerve almost to the pisiform bone. Here, it
passes backwards to divide into three (some-
times two) dorsal digital nerves. Typically, the
region of skin supplied by the dorsal branch
covers the medial half of the back of the hand,
and the skin on the dorsal aspect of the medial
2½ digits (see Fig. 11.6).
12 The superficial terminal branch of the radial nerve
(C6–C8) arises in front of the lateral epicondyle
of the humerus. It descends through the upper
two-thirds of the forearm lateral to the radial
artery, and then passes posteriorly about 7 cm
above the wrist. While winding round the radius
it pierces the deep fascia and divides into four
or five small dorsal digital nerves. In all, the
superficial terminal branch supplies the skin of
the lateral half of the dorsum of the hand, and
the dorsal surfaces of the lateral 2½ digits
including the thumb, except for the terminal
portions supplied by the median nerve.
DISSECTION
Make one horizontal incision in the arm at its junction
of upper one-third and lower two-thirds segments
(see Fig. 3.2) and a vertical incision through the centre
of arm and forearm till the wrist where another
transverse incision is given.
Reflect the skin on either side on the front as well as
on the back of the limb. Use this huge skin flap to cover
the limb after the dissection.
Figs 7.1a and b: The cutaneous nerves
--- Page 109 ---
UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
Competency achievement: The student should be able to:
AN 13.2 Describe dermatomes of upper limb.1
DERMATOMES
Definition
The area of skin supplied by one spinal segment is
called a dermatome. A typical dermatome extends
from the posterior median line to the anterior median
line around the trunk (see Fig. 5.2). However, in the
limbs, the dermatomes have migrated rather irregularly,
so that the original uniform pattern is disturbed.
Embryological Basis
The early human embryo shows regular segmentation
of the body. Each segment is supplied by the corres-
ponding segmental nerve. In an adult, all structures
including the skin, developed from one segment, are
supplied by their original segmental nerve. The limb
may be regarded as an extension of the body wall, and
the segments from which they are derived can be
deduced from the spinal nerves supplying them. The
limb buds arise in the area of the body wall supplied
by the lateral branches of anterior primary rami. The
nerves to the limbs represent these branches (Fig. 7.2).
Important Features
1 The cutaneous innervation of the upper limb is
derived:
a. Mainly from segments C5–C8 and T1 of the spinal
cord, and
Fig. 7.4: The upper limb bud grows out from the part of the
body wall supplied by the lateral cutaneous branches of the
anterior primary rami of spinal nerves
Fig. 7.2: The body wall is supplied by (A) the posterior primary
rami, (B) the lateral branches of the anterior primary rami, and
(C) the anterior branches of the anterior primary rami of the
spinal nerves. The limb buds develop from the area supplied by
the lateral branches of the anterior primary rami
b. Partly from the overlapping segments from above
(C3, C4) as well from below (T2, T3). The addi-
tional segments are found only at the proximal
end of the limb (Fig. 7.3).
2 Since the limb bud appears on the ventrolateral
aspect of the body wall, it is invariably supplied by
the anterior primary rami of the spinal nerves.
Posterior primary rami do not supply the limb.
It is possible that the ventral and dorsal divisions
of the trunks of the brachial plexus represent the
anterior and posterior branches of the lateral
cutaneous nerves (see Figs 4.14, 5.2 and 7.4).
3 There is varying degree of overlapping of adjoining
dermatomes, so that the area of sensory loss
following damage to the cord or nerve roots is always
less than the area of distribution of the dermatomes
(Fig. 7.5).
4 Each limb bud has a cephalic and a caudal border,
known as preaxial and postaxial borders, respectively.
In the upper limb, the thumb and radius lie along the
Fig. 7.3: Distribution of various segments in upper limb
--- Page 110 ---
CUTANEOUS NERVES, SUPERFICIAL VEINS AND LYMPHATIC DRAINAGE
Upper Limb
Section 1
preaxial border, and the little finger and ulna along
the postaxial border.
5 The dermatomes of the upper limb are distributed
in an orderly numerical sequence (Figs 7.6a and b).
a. Along the preaxial border, by segments C3–C6
with overlapping of the dermatomes.
b. The middle three digits (index, middle and ring
fingers) and the adjoining area of the palm are
supplied by segment C7.
c. The postaxial border is supplied (from below
upwards) by segments C8, T1, T2. There is
overlapping of the dermatomes.
6 As the limb elongates, it rotates laterally and gets
adducted and the central dermatome C7 gets pulled
in such a way that these are represented only in the
distal part of the limb, and are buried proximally.
On the front of the limb, areas supplied by C5 and
C6 segments adjoin the areas supplied by C8, T1 and
T2 segments. There is a dividing line between them,
known as the ventral axial line along which C7 is
buried proximally. It reaches the skin just proximal
to the wrist (Fig. 7.6a).
On the back of the limb, C7 reaches the skin just
proximal to the elbow. So the dorsal axial line ends
more proximal to the ventral axial line. There is no
overlapping across the ventral and dorsal axial lines
(Fig. 7.6b).
CLINICAL ANATOMY
• The area of sensory loss of the skin, following injuries
of the spinal cord or of the nerve roots, conforms to
the dermatomes. Therefore, the segmental level of
the damage to the spinal cord can be determined by
examining the dermatomes for touch, pain and
temperature. Note that injury to a peripheral nerve
produces sensory loss corresponding to the area of
distribution of that nerve.
• The spinal segments do not lie opposite the
corresponding vertebrae. In estimating the
position of a spinal segment in relation to the
surface of the body, it is important to remember
that a vertebral spine is always lower than the
corresponding spinal segment. As a rough guide,
it may be stated that in the cervical region, there
is a difference of one segment, e.g. the 5th cervical
spine lies lower than the 5th cervical spinal
segment. It overlies the 6th cervical spinal segment.
Spinal segments
Spine of vertebra
C1–C8
C1–C7
T1–T6
T1–T4
T7–T12
T5–T9
L1–L5
T10–T11
S1–S5 and Co1
T12–L1
Competency achievement: The student should be able to:
AN 13.1 Describe veins of upper limb and its lymphatic drainage.2
Fig. 7.5: Overlapping of the dermatomes
Figs 7.6a and b: Dermatomes: (a) Anterior aspect, and
(b) posterior aspect
--- Page 111 ---
UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
SUPERFICIAL VEINS
Superficial veins of the upper limb assume importance
in medical practice because these are most commonly
used for intravenous injections and for withdrawing
blood for testing.
General Remarks
1 Most of the superficial veins of the limb join together
to form two large veins, cephalic (preaxial) and
basilic (postaxial).
2 The superficial veins run away from pressure points.
Therefore, they are absent in the palm (fist area),
along the ulnar border of the forearm (supporting
border) and in the back of the arm and trapezius
region. This makes the course of the veins spiral, from
the dorsal to the ventral surface of the limb.
3 The preaxial vein is longer than the postaxial. In other
words, the preaxial vein drains into the deep
(axillary) vein more proximally (at the root of the
limb) than the postaxial vein which becomes deep
in the middle of the arm.
4 The earlier a vein becomes deep the better, because
the venous return is then assisted by muscular
compression. The load of the preaxial (cephalic) vein
is greatly relieved by the more efficient postaxial
(basilic) vein through a short circuiting channel (the
median cubital vein situated in front of the elbow)
and partly also by the deep veins through a perforator
vein connecting the median cubital to the deep vein.
5 The superficial veins are accompanied by cutaneous
nerves and superficial lymphatics, and not by
arteries. The superficial lymph nodes lie along the
veins, and the deep lymph nodes along the arteries.
6 The superficial veins are best utilised for intravenous
injections.
INDIVIDUAL VEINS
Dorsal Venous Arch
Dorsal venous arch lies on the dorsum of the hand
(Figs 7.7a and c). Its afferents (tributaries) include:
i. Three dorsal metacarpal veins.
ii. A dorsal digital vein from the medial side of the
little finger.
iii. A dorsal digital vein from the radial side of the index
finger.
iv. Two dorsal digital veins from the thumb.
v. Most of the blood from the palm courses through
veins passing around the margins of the hand and
also by perforating veins passing through the
interosseous spaces. Pressure on the palm during
gripping fails to impede the venous return due to
the mode of drainage of the palm into the dorsal
venous arch. The efferents of dorsal venous arch are
the cephalic and basilic veins.
Cephalic Vein
Cephalic vein is the preaxial vein of the upper limb
(cf. great saphenous vein of the lower limb).
Figs 7.7a and b: The superficial veins of the upper limb: (a) On the back, (b) on the front of the limb, and (c) schematic
--- Page 112 ---
CUTANEOUS NERVES, SUPERFICIAL VEINS AND LYMPHATIC DRAINAGE
Upper Limb
Section 1
It begins from the lateral end of the dorsal venous
arch.
It runs upwards:
i. Through the roof of the anatomical snuffbox.
ii. Winds around the lateral border of the distal part
of the forearm (Figs 7.7b and c).
iii. Continues upwards in front of the elbow and
along the lateral border of the biceps brachii.
iv. Pierces the deep fascia at the lower border of the
pectoralis major.
v. Runs in the deltopectoral groove up to the
infraclavicular fossa.
vi. It pierces the clavipectoral fascia and joins the
axillary vein (see Fig. 3.12).
At the elbow, the greater part of its blood is drained
into the basilic vein through the median cubital vein, and
partly also into the deep veins through the perforator
vein.
It is accompanied by the lateral cutaneous nerve
of the forearm, and the terminal part of the radial
nerve.
An accessory cephalic vein is sometimes present. It
ends by joining the cephalic vein near the elbow.
Basilic Vein
Basilic vein is the postaxial vein of the upper limb
(cf. short saphenous vein of the lower limb).
It begins from the medial end of the dorsal venous
arch (Figs 7.7a and c).
It runs upwards:
i. Along the back of the medial border of the forearm,
ii. Winds around this border near the elbow,
iii. Continues upwards in front of the elbow (medial
epicondyle) and along the medial margin of the
biceps brachii up to the middle of the arm, where
• It pierces the deep fascia, and
• Runs along the medial side of the brachial
artery up to the lower border of teres major
where it becomes the axillary vein.
About 2.5 cm above the medial epicondyle of the
humerus, it is joined by the median cubital vein.
It is accompanied by the posterior branch of
the medial cutaneous nerve of the forearm and the
terminal part of the dorsal branch of the ulnar nerve.
Median Cubital Vein
Medial cubital vein is a large communicating vein
which shunts blood from the cephalic to the basilic vein
(Fig. 7.7a).
It begins from the cephalic vein 2.5 cm below the
bend of the elbow, runs obliquely upward and
medially, and ends in the basilic vein 2.5 cm above the
medial epicondyle. It is separated from the brachial
artery by the bicipital aponeurosis.
It may receive tributaries from the front of the
forearm (median vein of the forearm) and is connected
to the deep veins through a perforator vein which
pierces the bicipital aponeurosis. The perforator vein
fixes the median cubital vein and thus makes it ideal
for intravenous injections.
Median Vein of the Forearm
Median vein of the forearm begins from the palmar
venous network, and ends in any one of the veins in
front of the elbow mostly in median cubital vein.
Deep Veins
Deep veins start as small venae comitantes running on
each side of digital veins. These continue proximally
as superficial and deep palmar arches.
Then, these course proximally to continue as venae
comitantes of radial and ulnar arteries; which further
join to form the brachial veins.
Brachial veins lie on each side of brachial artery.
These join the axillary vein at the lower border of teres
major. Axillary vein is described in axilla (see chapter 4).
Competency achievement: The student should be able to:
AN 11.3 Describe the anatomical basis of venepuncture of cubital
veins.3
CLINICAL ANATOMY
• The median cubital vein is the vein of choice for
intravenous injections, for withdrawing blood
from donors, and for cardiac catheterisation,
because it is fixed by the perforator and does not
slip away during piercing. When the median
cubital vein is absent, the basilic vein is preferred
over the cephalic vein because the former is a more
efficient channel (Fig. 7.8). Basilic vein runs along
straight path, whereas cephalic vein bends acutely
to drain into the axillary vein.
• The cephalic vein frequently communicates with
the external jugular vein by means of a small vein
which crosses in front of the clavicle. In operations
for removal of the breast (in carcinoma), the axillary
lymph nodes are also removed, and it sometimes
becomes necessary to remove a segment of the
axillary vein also. In these cases, the communication
between the cephalic vein and the external jugular
vein enlarges considerably and helps in draining
blood from the upper limb (Fig. 7.9).
In case of fracture of the clavicle, the rupture of
the communicating channel may lead to formation
of a large haematoma, i.e. collection of blood.
--- Page 113 ---
UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
Along the course of these lymph vessels, there are
groups of lymph nodes.
Lymph vessels are difficult to see and special
techniques are required for their visualisation.
Lymph nodes are small bean-like structures that are
usually present in groups. These are not normally
palpable in the living subject.
However, they often become enlarged in disease,
particularly by infection or by malignancy in the area
from which they receive lymph. They then become
palpable and examination of these nodes provides
valuable information regarding the presence and
spread of disease.
It is, therefore, of importance for the medical student
to know the lymphatic drainage of the different parts
of the body.
Lymph Nodes
The main lymph nodes of the upper limb are the axillary
lymph nodes. These comprise anterior, posterior,
lateral, central and apical groups. These have been
described in Chapter 4 (see Fig. 4.11). Other nodes are
as follows:
1 The infraclavicular nodes lie in or on the clavipectoral
fascia along the cephalic vein. They drain the upper
part of the breast, and the thumb with its web.
2 The deltopectoral node lies in the deltopectoral groove
along the cephalic vein. It is a displaced node of the
infraclavicular set, and drains similar structures.
3 The superficial cubital or supratrochlear nodes lie just
above the medial epicondyle along the basilic vein.
They drain the ulnar side of the hand and forearm.
4 A few other deep lymph nodes lie in the following
regions:
i. Along the medial side of the brachial artery.
ii. At the bifurcation of the brachial artery (deep
cubital lymph node).
iii. Occasionally along the arteries of the forearm.
Lymphatics
Superficial Lymphatics
Superficial lymphatics are much more numerous than
the deep lymphatics. They collect lymph from the skin
and subcutaneous tissues. Most of them ultimately
drain into the axillary nodes, except for:
i. A few vessels from the medial side of the forearm
which drain into the superficial cubital nodes.
ii. A few vessels from the lateral side of the forearm
which drain into the deltopectoral or infraclavicular
nodes.
The dense palmar plexus drains mostly into the lymph
vessels onto the dorsum of the hand, where these
continue with the vessels of the forearm. Lymph vessels
of the back of forearm and arm curve round their medial
Fig. 7.9: A communicating vein helps in venous drainage from
upper limb
LYMPH NODES AND LYMPHATIC DRAINAGE
When circulating blood reaches the capillaries, part of
its fluid content passes through them into the
surrounding tissue as tissue fluid. Most of this tissue
fluid re-enters the capillaries at their venous ends. Some
of it is, however, returned to the circulation through a
separate set of lymphatic vessels. These vessels begin as
lymphatic capillaries which drain into larger vessels.
Fig. 7.8: Intravenous injection being given in the median cubital
vein
--- Page 114 ---
CUTANEOUS NERVES, SUPERFICIAL VEINS AND LYMPHATIC DRAINAGE
Upper Limb
Section 1
and lateral surfaces and ascend up to reach the floor of
the axilla. Thus, there is a vertical area of lymph shed in
the middle of back of forearm and arm (Figs 7.10a and b).
Deep Lymphatics
Deep lymphatics are much less numerous than the
superficial lymphatics. They drain structures lying deep
to the deep fascia. They run along the main blood vessels
of the limb, and end in the axillary nodes. Some of the
lymph may pass through the deep lymph nodes present
along the axillary vein as mentioned above.
CLINICAL ANATOMY
• Inflammation of lymph vessels is known as
lymphangitis. In acute lymphangitis, the vessels
may be seen through the skin as red, tender
(painful to touch) streaks (Fig. 7.11).
• Inflammation of lymph nodes is called lymphadenitis.
It may be acute or chronic. The nodes enlarge and
become palpable and painful (Fig. 7.12).
• Obstruction to lymph vessels can result in accumu-
lation of tissue fluid in areas of drainage. This is
called lymphoedema. This may be caused by
carcinoma because of surgical removal of lymph
nodes (Fig. 7.13b).
• Pain along the medial side of upper arm is due to
pressure on the intercostobrachial nerve by
enlarged central group of axillary lymph nodes.
Figs 7.10a and b: The superficial lymphatics of the upper limb
Fig. 7.12: Enlarged axillary lymph nodes
Fig. 7.11: Lymphangitis
--- Page 115 ---
UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
FACTS TO REMEMBER
• Ventral axial line ends close to wrist joint, while
dorsal axial line ends close to elbow joint.
• Dermatome is an area of skin supplied by single
spinal segment through a pair of right and left spinal
nerves with both of its dorsal and ventral rami.
• There is no overlapping of the nerve supply across
the axial lines.
• Cephalic vein at its beginning in the ‘anatomical
snuffbox’ and median cubital vein near the elbow
are the veins of choice for intravenous infusions.
• Median cubital vein is protected from the brachial
artery by the bicipital aponeurosis.
CLINICOANATOMICAL PROBLEMS
Case 1
A patient came dehydrated with history of diarrhoea
and vomiting. He needed intravenous fluids.
• Which vein is most convenient for intravenous
infusion of glucose and why?
• How does one make the vein prominent?
Ans: Median cubital vein is most conveniently placed
anterior to the elbow joint.
Deep to the vein is bicipital aponeurosis which
mostly prevents the needle from entering into the
underlying brachial artery.
The vein is made prominent by tying a tourniquet
on the arm or by keeping one’s hand tightly around
the arm, and asking the patient to do flexion and
extension of elbow in a fast mode.
Due to this exercise, the venous return gets
increased, but is prevented from drainage into deeper
veins due to compression applied to the arm. This
makes the superficial veins prominent.
Case 2
A female patient of 60 years felt two nodular
swellings in her right axilla.
• What parts of the body have to be examined?
• What is the probable diagnosis of these swellings?
Ans: The parts to be examined are both the mammary
glands for any tumour, axilla of both sides for more
palpable lymph nodes, supraclavicular and infra-
clavicular lymph nodes, examination of abdomen and
pelvis for any spread in the liver or ovary.
On examination of her right breast, there was a firm
mass which she did not feel.
Since there was a firm painless mass in the upper
lateral quadrant of her right breast, the diagnosis would
be secondary (metastasis) in the axillary lymph node
from primary breast tumour. It would be confirmed
by fine needle aspiration cytology and other tests.
FURTHER READING
• Tanis PJ, Nieweg OE, Valdes Olmos RA, et al. Anatomy and
physiology of lymphatic drainage of the breast from the
perspective of sentinel node biopsy. J Am Coll Surg 2001;
192:399–409.
Figs 7.13a and b: (a) Normal upper limb, and (b) lympho-
edema due to removal of axillary lymph nodes in case of
carcinoma of the breast
1–3 From Medical Council of India, Competency based Undergraduate Curriculum for the Indian Medical Graduate, 2018;1:44–80.
--- Page 116 ---
CUTANEOUS NERVES, SUPERFICIAL VEINS AND LYMPHATIC DRAINAGE
Upper Limb
Section 1
1. Write short notes/enumerate:
a. Nerve supply of dorsum of hand
b. Nerve supply nail beds of all 5 digits
c. Median cubital vein
d. Ventral axial line
2. Describe the beginning, course and termination of
basilic vein.
3. Describe the lymphatic drainage of upper limb.
Enumerate the groups of lymph nodes of the
axilla.
• Name the cutaneous nerves supplying various areas
of the arm.
• Name the cutaneous nerves innervating the palm.
• Name the nerve supply all nail beds.
• Where does cephalic vein start?
• In which box cephalic vein lies on the lateral side of
the wrist?
• Where does median cubital vein start and end?
• What is the importance of median cubital vein?
• Where does cephalic vein drain?
• What fascia is pierced by cephalic vein before it
drains into a big vein?
• At what level, basilic vein becomes the axillary vein?
• Name the axillary lymph nodes and other lymph
nodes in upper limb.
• What is lymphoedema? What is its common cause?
• Where does ventral axial line end in UL (upper limb)?
• Where does dorsal axial line end in UL?
• Which are the commonly used veins for veni-
puncture?
1. Skin of nail bed of ring finger is supplied by:
a. Lateral half by median, medial half by ulnar
b. Medial half by median, lateral half by radial
c. Whole by median nerve
d. Whole by ulnar nerve
2. Skin of anterior, medial and lateral sides of arm is
supplied by all, except:
a. Medial cutaneous nerve of arm
b. Lateral supraclavicular nerve
c. Posterior cutaneous nerve of arm
d. Intercostobrachial nerve
3. Ventral axial line extends till:
a. Wrist joint
b. Elbow joint
c. Middle of forearm
d. Middle of arm
4. Cephalic vein drains into axillary vein:
a. In lower part of arm
b. In upper part of arm
c. In the forearm
d. In infraclavicular fossa
5. Lymph shed lies on the:
a. Lateral side of arm
b. Medial side of arm
c. Anterior aspect of arm
d. Posterior aspect of arm
6. Spinal segments T1–T6 lie opposite to:
a. Spines of 1–4 thoracic vertebrae
b. Spines of 1–6 thoracic vertebrae
c. Spines of 2–7 thoracic spines
d. Spines of 2–8 thoracic spines
1. a
2. c
3. a
4. d
5. d
6. a
--- Page 117 ---
INTRODUCTION
The arm extends from the shoulder joint till the elbow
joint. The skeleton of the arm is a ‘solo’ bone, the
humerus. Medial and lateral intermuscular septa divide
the arm into an anterior or flexor compartment and a
posterior or extensor compartment, to give each
compartment its individuality and freedom of action.
Since the structures in the front of arm continue across
the elbow joint into the cubital fossa, the cubital fossa
is also included in this chapter. The arm is called
brachium, so most of the structures in this chapter are
named accordingly, like brachialis, coracobrachialis and
brachial artery.
SURFACE LANDMARKS
The following landmarks can be felt in the living subject.
1 The greater tubercle of the humerus is the most lateral
bony point in the shoulder region. It can be felt just
below the acromion process, deep to the deltoid
when the arm is by the side of the trunk (Fig. 8.1).
2 The shaft of the humerus is felt only indistinctly
because it is surrounded by muscles in its upper
half. In the lower half, the humerus is covered
anteriorly by the biceps brachii and brachialis, and
posteriorly by the triceps brachii.
3 The medial epicondyle of the humerus is a prominent
bony projection on the medial side of the elbow. It
is best seen and felt in a mid-flexed elbow.
4 The lateral epicondyle of the humerus is less prominent
than the medial. It can be felt in the upper part of
the depression on the posterolateral aspect of the
elbow in the extended position of the forearm.
5 The medial and lateral supracondylar ridges are better
defined in the lower portions of the medial and
lateral borders of the humerus. They can be felt in
The man who gets angry, at the right things, with the right people, in the right
way, at the right time and for the right length of time is commended 
—Aristotle
the lower one-fourth of the arm as upward
continuations of the epicondyles.
6 The deltoid forms the rounded contour of the
shoulder. The apex of the muscle is attached to the
deltoid tuberosity located at the middle of the
anterolateral surface of the humerus.
7 The coracobrachialis forms an inconspicuous rounded
ridge in the upper part of the medial side of the arm.
Pulsations of the brachial artery can be felt in the
depression behind it.
8 The biceps brachii muscle is overlapped above by the
pectoralis major and by the deltoid. Below these
muscles, the biceps forms a conspicuous elevation
on the front of the arm. Upon flexing the elbow, the
contracting muscle becomes still more prominent.
The tendon of the biceps can be felt in front of the
Fig. 8.1: Surface landmarks—front of upper arm
--- Page 118 ---
Upper Limb
Section 1
elbow. The tendon is a guide to the brachial artery
which lies on its medial side.
9 The brachial artery can be felt in front of the elbow
joint just medial to the tendon of the biceps brachii.
Brachial pulsations are used for recording the blood
pressure.
10 The ulnar nerve can be rolled by the palpating finger
behind the medial epicondyle of the humerus. During
leprosy, this nerve becomes thick and enlarged.
11 The superficial cubital veins can be made more
prominent by applying tight pressure round the arm
and then contracting the forearm muscles by
clenching and releasing the fist a few times. The
cephalic vein runs upwards along the lateral border
of the biceps. The basilic vein can be seen along the
lower half of the medial border of the biceps. The
cephalic and basilic veins are connected together in
front of the elbow by the median cubital vein which
runs obliquely upwards and medially.
COMPARTMENTS OF THE ARM
The arm is divided into anterior and posterior
compartments by extension of deep fascia which are
called the medial and lateral intermuscular septa
(Fig. 8.2). These septa provide additional surface for the
attachment of muscles. They also form planes along
which nerves and blood vessels travel. The septa are well
defined only in the lower half of the arm and are attached
to the medial and lateral borders and supracondylar
ridges of the humerus. The medial septum is pierced by
the ulnar nerve and the superior ulnar collateral artery;
the lateral septum is pierced by the radial nerve and
radial collateral artery or the anterior descending branch
of the profunda brachii artery (Fig. 8.7).
Two additional septa are present in the anterior
compartment of the arm. The transverse septum
separates the biceps from the brachialis and encloses
the musculocutaneous nerve. The anteroposterior septum
separates the brachialis from the muscles attached to
the lateral supracondylar ridge; it encloses the radial
nerve and the anterior descending branch of the
profunda brachii artery.
Competency achievement: The student should be able to:
AN 11.1 Describe and demonstrate muscle groups of upper arm
with emphasis on biceps and triceps brachii.1
ANTERIOR COMPARTMENT
MUSCLES
Muscles of the anterior compartment of the arm are
the coracobrachialis, the biceps brachii and the
brachialis. They are described in Tables 8.1 and 8.2.
Morphological Importance of Coracobrachialis
Morphologically, the muscle is very important for
following reasons.
The coracobrachialis represents the medial compart-
ment, which is so well developed in the thigh.
In some animals, it is a tricipital muscle. In human,
the upper two heads have fused and musculocutaneous
nerve passes between the two, and the lowest third head
has disappeared. Persistence of the lower head in
human is associated with the presence of ‘ligament of
Struthers’, which is a fibrous band extending from the
trochlear spine to the medial epicondyle of the humerus,
to which the third head of the coracobrachialis is
inserted, and from the lower part of which the pronator
teres muscle takes origin. Beneath the ligament pass the
median nerve or brachial artery or both.
The front or anterior compartment of the arm is
homologous with flexor and medial compartments of
the thigh. The flexor compartment of thigh lies
posteriorly because the lower limb bud rotates medially.
Competency achievement: The student should be able to:
AN 11.2 Identify and describe origin, course, relations, branches
(or tributaries), termination of important nerves and vessels in arm.2
NERVES
Musculocutaneous Nerve
The musculocutaneous nerve is the main nerve of the
front of the arm, and continues below the elbow as the
lateral cutaneous nerve of the forearm (see Fig. 7.1a).
It is a branch of the lateral cord of the brachial plexus,
arising at the lower border of the pectoralis minor (see
Fig. 4.14) in the axilla.
Fig. 8.2: Transverse section through the distal one-third of the
arm, showing the intermuscular septa and the compartments
--- Page 119 ---
UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
Root Value
The root value of musculocutaneous nerve is ventral
rami of C5–C7 segments of spinal cord.
Origin, Course and Termination
Musculocutaneous nerve arises from the lateral cord
of brachial plexus in the lower part of the axilla. It
accompanies the third part of the axillary artery. It then
enters the front of arm, where it pierces coracobrachialis
muscle.
Musculocutaneous nerve runs downwards and
laterally between biceps brachii and brachialis muscles
to reach the lateral side of the tendon of biceps brachii.
It terminates by continuing as the lateral cutaneous
nerve of forearm 2 cm above the bend of the elbow
(Fig. 8.6).
Relations
In the lower part of the axilla: It accompanies the third
part of the axillary artery and has the following relations.
Anteriorly: Pectoralis major.
Posteriorly: Subscapularis.
Medially: Axillary artery and lateral root of the median
nerve (see Fig. 4.9).
Laterally: Coracobrachialis (see Fig. 4.9).
Musculocutaneous nerve leaves the axilla, and enters
the front of the arm by piercing the coracobrachialis
(Fig. 8.6).
In the arm: It runs downward and laterally between
the biceps brachii and brachialis to reach the lateral side
of the tendon of the biceps. It ends by piercing the fascia
2 cm above the bend of the forearm.
Table 8.1: Attachments of muscles
Muscle
Origin
Insertion
1. Coracobrachialis
• The medial aspect of tip of the coracoid process with
• The middle 5 cm of the medial border of
(see Fig. 2.8)
the short head of the biceps brachii (Fig. 8.3a)
the humerus
2. Biceps brachii
It has two heads of origin:
• Posterior rough part of the radial tuberosity.
(Fig. 8.3b)
• The short head arises with coracobrachialis from the
The tendon is twisted; the anterior fibres
lateral aspect of tip of the coracoid process
become lateral and posterior fibres become
• The long head arises from the supraglenoid tubercle
medial. The tendon is separated from the
of the scapula and from the glenoidal labrum. The
anterior part of the tuberosity by a bursa
tendon is intracapsular
(Fig. 8.4)
• The tendon gives off an extension called
the bicipital aponeurosis which extends to
ulna and it separates median cubital vein
from brachial artery
3. Brachialis
• Lower half of the front of the humerus, including both
• Coronoid process and ulnar tuberosity
(Fig. 8.5)
the anteromedial and anterolateral surfaces and the
• Rough anterior surface of the coronoid
anterior border
process of the ulna
Superiorly the origin embraces the insertion of the
deltoid
• Medial and lateral intermuscular septa
Table 8.2: Nerve supply and actions of muscles
Muscle
Nerve supply
Actions
1. Coracobrachialis
Musculocutaneous nerve (C5–C7)
Flexes the arm at the shoulder joint
(Fig. 8.3a)
2. Biceps brachii
Musculocutaneous nerve (C5–C6)
• It is strong supinator when the forearm is flexed
(Figs 8.3b and c,
All screwing movements are done with it
8.6, 8.7)
• It is a flexor of the elbow
• The short head is a flexor of the arm
• The long head prevents upwards displacement of the
head of the humerus
• It can be tested against resistance as shown in Fig. 8.8
3. Brachialis
• Musculocutaneous nerve is motor
Flexes forearm at the elbow joint
• Radial nerve is proprioceptive
--- Page 120 ---
Upper Limb
Section 1
Fig. 8.3a: Short head of biceps brachii and coacobrachialis
muscles
Fig. 8.3b: The biceps brachii muscle in extended elbow
Fig. 8.3c: Intracapsular course of long head of biceps brachii muscle
--- Page 121 ---
UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
Fig. 8.4: The precise mode of insertion of the biceps brachii
muscle
Fig. 8.5: The origin and insertion of the brachialis muscle
Branches and Distribution
Muscular branches: It supplies the following muscles of
the front of the arm.
i. Coracobrachialis
ii. Biceps brachii, long and short heads
iii. Brachialis (Figs 8.6 and 8.7).
Cutaneous branches: Through the lateral cutaneous nerve
of the forearm, it supplies the skin of the lateral side of
the forearm from the elbow to the wrist including the
ball of the thumb (see Fig. 7.1a).
Articular branches:
i. The elbow joint through its branch to the brachialis.
ii. The shoulder joint through a separate branch which
enters the humerus along with its nutrient artery.
Communicating branches: The musculocutaneous nerve
through lateral cutaneous nerve of forearm
communicates with the neighbouring nerves, namely
the superficial branch of the radial nerve, the posterior
cutaneous nerve of the forearm, and the palmar
cutaneous branch of the median nerve.
Fig. 8.6: The course of the musculocutaneous nerve
--- Page 122 ---
Upper Limb
Section 1
Median Nerve
Median nerve is closely related to the brachial artery
throughout its course in the arm (Fig. 8.9).
In the upper part, it is lateral to the artery; in the
middle of the arm, it crosses the artery from lateral to
the medial side; and remains on the medial side of the
artery right up to the elbow.
In the arm, the median nerve gives off a branch to
the pronator teres just above the elbow and vascular
branches to the brachial artery.
An articular branch to the elbow joint arises at the
elbow.
Ulnar Nerve
Ulnar nerve runs on the medial side of the brachial
artery up to the level of insertion of the coraco-
brachialis, where it pierces the medial intermuscular
septum and enters the posterior compartment of the
arm. It is accompanied by the superior ulnar collateral
vessels.
At the elbow, it passes behind the medial epicondyle
where it can be palpated with a finger (Fig. 8.13a).
Radial Nerve
At the beginning of the brachial artery, the radial nerve
lies posterior to the artery (see Fig. 4.9). Soon the nerve
leaves the artery by entering the radial (spiral) groove
on the back of the arm where it is accompanied by the
profunda brachii artery (Fig. 8.13a).
In the lower part of the arm, the nerve appears
again on the front of the arm where it lies between
the brachialis (medially); and the brachioradialis
and extensor carpi radialis longus (laterally)
(Fig. 8.17). Its branches will be discussed with the
back of the arm.
DISSECTION
Make an incision in the middle of deep fascia of the
upper arm right down up to the elbow joint. Reflect the
flaps sideways.
The most prominent muscle seen is the biceps
brachii. Deep to this, another muscle called brachialis
is seen easily. In the fascial septum between the two
muscles lies the musculocutaneous nerve (a branch of
the lateral cord of brachial plexus). Trace the tendinous
long head of biceps arising from the supraglenoid
tubercle and the short head arising from the tip of the
coracoid process of scapula. Identify coracobrachialis
muscle on the medial side of biceps brachii. This muscle
is easily identified as it is pierced by musculocutaneous
nerve. Clean the branches of the nerve supplying all
the three muscles dissected (refer to BDC App).
CLINICAL ANATOMY
Physician holds the patient’s wrist firmly, not letting it
move. Patient is requested to flex the elbow against
the resistance offered by physician’s hand. One can see
and palpate hardening biceps brachii muscle (Fig. 8.8).
Fig. 8.7: Transverse section passing through the lower one-third of the arm
Fig. 8.8: Testing biceps brachii against resistance
--- Page 123 ---
UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
Biceps reflex: Musculocutaneous nerve is tested by
biceps reflex. Tap the tendon of biceps with forearm
pronated and partially extended at the elbow.
Normal reflex is jerk-like flexion of elbow joint.
Competency achievement: The student should be able to:
AN 11.2 Identify and describe origin, course, relations, branches (or
tributaries), and termination of important nerves and vessels in arm.3
BRACHIAL ARTERY
Features
Brachial artery is the continuation of the axillary artery.
It extends from the lower border of the teres major
muscle to a point in front of the elbow, at the level of
the neck of the radius, just medial to the tendon of the
biceps brachii.
Beginning, Course and Termination
Brachial artery begins at the lower border of teres major
muscle as continuation of axillary artery. It runs
downwards and laterally in the front of arm and crosses
the elbow joint. It ends at the level of the neck of radius
in the cubital fossa by dividing into its two terminal
branches, the radial and ulnar arteries.
Relations
1 It runs downwards and laterally, from the medial
side of the arm to the front of the elbow.
2 It is superficial throughout its extent and is
accompanied by two venae comitantes.
3 Anteriorly, in the middle of the arm, it is crossed by
the median nerve from the lateral to the medial side;
and in front of the elbow, it is covered by the bicipital
aponeurosis and the median cubital vein (Fig. 8.9).
4 Posteriorly, it is related to:
i. The triceps brachii
ii. The radial nerve and the profunda brachii artery.
5 Medially, in the upper part, it is related to the ulnar
nerve and the basilic vein, and in the lower part to
the median nerve (Figs 8.9a and b).
Figs 8.9a and b: The course and relations of the brachial artery
--- Page 124 ---
Upper Limb
Section 1
6 Laterally, it is related to the coracobrachialis,
the biceps brachii and the median nerve in its upper
part; and to the tendon of the biceps brachii at the
elbow (Figs 8.9a and b).
7 At the elbow, the structures from the medial to the
lateral side are:
i. Median nerve
ii. Brachial artery
iii. Biceps brachii tendon
iv. Radial nerve on a deeper plane (MBBR).
Branches
1 Unnamed muscular branches.
2 The profunda brachii artery arises just below the teres
major and accompanies the radial nerve.
3 The superior ulnar collateral branch arises in the upper
part of the arm and accompanies the ulnar nerve
(Figs 8.10a and b).
4 A nutrient artery is given off to the humerus.
5 The inferior ulnar collateral (or supratrochlear) branch
arises in the lower part and takes part in the
anastomoses around the elbow joint.
6 The artery ends by dividing into two terminal
branches, the radial and ulnar arteries.
Competency achievement: The student should be able to:
AN 11.6 Describe the anastomoses around the elbow joint.4
Anastomoses around the Elbow Joint
Anastomoses around the elbow joint link the brachial
artery with the upper ends of the radial and ulnar arteries.
They supply the ligaments and bones of the joint. The
anastomoses can be subdivided into the following parts.
In front of the lateral epicondyle of the humerus, the
anterior descending (radial collateral) branch of the
profunda brachii anastomoses with the radial recurrent
branch of the radial artery (Figs 8.10a and b).
Behind the lateral epicondyle of the humerus, the
posterior descending branch of the profunda brachii
artery (middle collateral) anastomoses with the
interosseous recurrent branch of the posterior
interosseous artery.
In front of the medial epicondyle of the humerus, the
inferior ulnar collateral branch of the brachial artery
anastomoses with the anterior ulnar recurrent branch
of the ulnar artery.
Behind the medial epicondyle of the humerus, the
superior ulnar collateral branch of the brachial artery
anastomoses with the posterior ulnar recurrent branch
of the ulnar artery.
DISSECTION
Dissect the brachial artery as it lies on the medial side
of the upper part of the arm medial to median nerve
and lateral to ulnar nerve (Figs 8.9a and b).
Figs 8.10a and b: Anastomoses around the elbow joint
--- Page 125 ---
UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
Fig. 8.12: Palpable arteries in the body
Fig. 8.11: Blood pressure being taken
In the lower half of the upper arm, the brachial artery
is seen lateral to the median nerve as the nerve crosses
the brachial artery from lateral to medial side. Note that
the median nerve and brachial artery are forming
together a neurovascular bundle (refer to BDC App).
Ulnar nerve accompanied by the superior ulnar
collateral branch of the brachial artery will be dissected
later as it reaches the posterior (extensor) compartment
of the upper arm after piercing the medial intermuscular
septum (refer to BDC App).
Look for the radial nerve on the posterior aspect of
artery before it enters the radial groove.
Clean the branches of brachial artery and identify
other arteries which take part in the arterial
anastomoses around the elbow joint.
CLINICAL ANATOMY
• Brachial pulsations are felt or auscultated in front
of the elbow just medial to the tendon of biceps
for recording the blood pressure (Fig. 8.11).
Figure 8.12 shows other palpable arteries.
• Although the brachial artery can be compressed
anywhere along its course, it can be compressed
most favourably in the middle of the arm, where
it lies on the tendon of the coracobrachialis.
• Blood for blood gas analysis is collected from
brachial artery.
Changes at the Level of Insertion of Coracobrachialis
1 Bone: The circular shaft becomes triangular below
this level.
2 Fascial septa: The medial and lateral intermuscular
septa become better defined from this level down
(Fig. 8.5).
3 Muscles:
i. Deltoid and coracobrachialis are inserted at this level
(Fig. 8.3a).
ii. Upper end of origin of brachialis.
iii. Upper end of origin of the medial head of triceps
brachii.
4 Arteries:
i. The brachial artery passes from the medial side
of the arm to its anterior aspect.
ii. The profunda brachii artery runs in the spiral
groove and divides into its anterior descending/
radial collateral artery and posterior descending/
middle collateral branches (Fig. 8.9).
iii. The superior ulnar collateral artery originates
from the brachial artery, and pierces the medial
intermuscular septum along with the ulnar nerve.
iv. The nutrient artery of the humerus enters the bone.
5 Veins:
i. The basilic vein pierces the deep fascia (Fig. 8.13b).
ii. Two venae comitantes of the brachial artery may
unite to form one brachial vein.
6 Nerves:
i. The median nerve crosses the brachial artery from
the lateral to the medial side (Fig. 8.9).
--- Page 126 ---
Upper Limb
Section 1
Medially –
Lateral border of the pronator teres.
Base
It is directed upwards, and is represented
by an imaginary line joining the front of
two epicondyles of the humerus.
ii. The ulnar nerve pierces the medial intermuscular
septum with the superior ulnar collateral artery
and goes to the posterior compartment (Fig. 8.9).
iii. The radial nerve pierces the lateral intermuscular
septum with the anterior descending (radial
collateral) branch of the profunda brachii artery
and passes from the posterior to the anterior
compartment (Fig. 8.13a).
iv. The medial cutaneous nerve of the arm pierces
the deep fascia (Fig. 8.13b).
v. The medial cutaneous nerve of the forearm
pierces the deep fascia (Fig. 8.13b).
Competency achievement: The student should be able to:
AN 11.5 Identify and describe boundaries and contents of cubital
fossa.5
CUBITAL FOSSA
Features
Cubital (Latin cubitus, elbow) fossa is a triangular hollow
situated on the front of the elbow. (It is homologous
with the popliteal fossa of the lower limb situated on
the back of the knee.)
Boundaries
Laterally –
Medial border of the brachioradialis
(Fig. 8.14).
Figs 8.13a and b: Changes in positions of nerve, veins and arteries
Fig. 8.14: Boundaries of the right cubital fossa
--- Page 127 ---
UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
Apex
It is directed downwards, and is formed
by the area where brachioradialis crosses
the pronator teres muscle.
Roof
The roof of the cubital fossa (Fig. 8.15) is formed by:
a. Skin
b. Superficial fascia containing the median cubital vein
joining the cephalic and basilic veins. The lateral
cutaneous nerve of the forearm lies along with
cephalic vein and the medial cutaneous nerve of the
forearm along with basilic vein.
c. Deep fascia
d. Bicipital aponeurosis
Floor
It is formed by:
i. Brachialis (Figs 8.16a and b)
ii. Supinator surrounding the upper part of radius
Contents
The fossa is actually very narrow. The contents
described are seen after retracting the boundaries. From
medial to the lateral side, the contents are as follows:
1 The median nerve: It gives branches to flexor carpi
radialis, palmaris longus, flexor digitorum
superficialis and leaves the fossa by passing between
the two heads of pronator teres (Fig. 8.18).
2 The termination of the brachial artery, and the beginning
of the radial and ulnar arteries lie in the fossa.
The radial artery is smaller and more superficial than
the ulnar artery. It gives off the radial recurrent branch.
Fig. 8.15: Structures in the roof of the right cubital fossa
Fig. 8.17: Contents of the right cubital fossa; mnemonic—MBBR
Figs 8.16a and b: The floor of the cubital fossa is formed by
the brachialis and supinator muscles: (a) Surface view, and
(b) cross-sectional view
--- Page 128 ---
Upper Limb
Section 1
4 The radial nerve: It descends medial to lateral
epicondyle to enter cubital fossa. In the fossa, it gives
off the posterior interosseous nerve or deep branch
of the radial nerve which gives branches to extensor
capri radialis brevis and supinator. Then it leaves
the fossa by piercing the supinator muscle (Fig. 8.18).
The remaining superficial branch runs in the front
of forearm for some distance.
DISSECTION
Identify the structures (see text) present in the roof of a
shallow cubital fossa located on the front of the elbow.
Separate the lateral and medial boundaries formed
respectively by the brachioradialis and pronator teres
muscles (Figs 8.14 and 8.19). Clean the contents:
i. Median nerve on the medial side of brachial artery.
ii. Terminal part of brachial artery bifurcating into radial
and ulnar arteries (refer to BDC App).
iii. The tendon of biceps brachii muscle between the
brachial artery and radial nerve.
iv. The radial nerve on a deeper plane on the lateral
side of biceps tendon.
Identify brachialis and supinator muscles, forming
the floor of cubital fossa.
CLINICAL ANATOMY
• The cubital region is important for the following
reasons:
a. The median cubital vein is often the vein of
choice for intravenous injections (see Fig. 7.8).
It is used for introducing cardiac catheters to
get sample of blood from various chambers of
heart.
b. The blood pressure is universally recorded by
auscultating the brachial artery in front of the
elbow (Fig. 8.11).
• The anatomy of the cubital fossa is useful while
dealing with the fracture around the elbow, like
the supracondylar fracture of the humerus.
POSTERIOR COMPARTMENT
Features
The region contains the triceps muscle, the radial nerve
and the profunda brachii artery. The nerve and artery
run through the muscle. The ulnar nerve runs through
the lower part of this compartment.
Competency achievement: The student should be able to:
AN 11.1 Describe and demonstrate muscle groups of upper arm
with emphasis on biceps and triceps brachii.
Biceps has been discribed in Tables 8.1 and 8.2.6
Fig. 8.19: Contents of the cubital fossa seen in cross-section
The ulnar artery goes deep to both heads of pronator
teres and runs downwards and medially, being
separated from the median nerve by the deep head
of the pronator teres (Fig. 8.19).
Ulnar artery gives off the anterior ulnar recurrent,
the posterior ulnar recurrent, and the common
interosseous branches (Fig. 8.10).
The common interosseous branch divides into the
anterior and posterior interosseous arteries, and
latter gives off the interosseous recurrent branch.
3 The tendon of the biceps brachii (Fig. 8.17).
Fig. 8.18: Contents of right cubital fossa (schematic)
--- Page 129 ---
UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
TRICEPS BRACHII MUSCLE
Origin
Triceps brachii muscle arises by the following three
heads (Figs 8.20a and b).
1 The long head arises from the infraglenoid tubercle
of the scapula; it is the longest of the three heads
(Fig. 8.21).
2 The lateral head arises from an oblique ridge on the
upper part of the posterior surface of the humerus,
corresponding to the lateral lip of the radial (spiral)
groove (Fig. 8.20a and b).
3 The medial head arises from a large triangular area on
the posterior surface of the humerus below the
radial groove, as well as from the medial and lateral
intermuscular septa. At the level of the radial
groove, the medial head is medial to the lateral head
(see Figs 2.14a and b).
Insertion
The long and lateral heads converge and fuse to form a
superficial flattened tendon which covers the medial
head and are inserted into the posterior part of the
superior surface of the olecranon process (Fig. 8.20). The
medial head is inserted partly into the superficial
tendon, and partly into the olecranon process. Although
the medial head is separated from the capsule of the
elbow joint by a small bursa, a few of its fibres are
inserted into this part of the capsule: This prevents
nipping of the capsule during extension of the arm.
These fibres are referred to as the articularis cubiti, or as
the subanconeus.
Nerve Supply
Each head receives a separate branch from the radial
nerve (C7, C8). The branches arise in the axilla and in
the radial groove.
Actions
The triceps is a powerful active extensor of the elbow.
The long head causes extension and adduction of arm
at shoulder joint. It supports the head of the humerus
in the abducted position of the arm. Gravity extends
the elbow passively.
Electromyography has shown that the medial head
of the triceps is active in all forms of extension, and the
actions of the long and lateral heads are minimal, except
when acting against resistance.
Figs 8.20a and b: The triceps brachii muscle
--- Page 130 ---
Upper Limb
Section 1
DISSECTION
Reflect the skin of back of arm to view the triceps brachii
muscle. Define its attachments and separate the long
head of the muscle from its lateral head.
Radial nerve will be seen passing between the long
head of triceps and medial border of the humerus. Note
the continuity of radial nerve up to axilla. Carefully cut
through the lateral head of triceps to expose radial nerve
along with profunda brachii vessels. Note that the radial
nerve lies in the radial groove, on the back of humerus,
passing between the lateral head of triceps above and
its medial head below. In the lower part of arm, the radial
nerve lies on the front of elbow just lateral to the
brachialis, dividing into two terminal branches in the
cubital fossa (refer to BDC App).
The ulnar nerve (which was seen in the anterior
compartment of arm till its middle) pierces the medial
intermuscular septum with its accompanying vessels,
reaches the back of elbow and may easily be palpated
on the back of medial epicondyle of humerus.
CLINICAL ANATOMY
• In radial nerve injuries in the arm, the triceps
brachii usually escapes complete paralysis because
the two nerves supplying it, arise in the axilla.
• Physician holds the flexed forearm firmly. Patient
is requested to extend his elbow against the
resistance of the physician’s hand. The contracting
triceps brachii is felt (Fig. 8.22).
RADIAL NERVE OR MUSCULOSPIRAL NERVE
Radial nerve is the largest branch of the posterior cord
of the brachial plexus with a root value of C5–C8 and
T1 (see Fig. 4.14).
Origin, Course and Termination
Radial nerve is given off from the posterior cord in the
lower part of axilla.
1 It runs behind third part of axillary artery (see
Figs 4.7c and d).
2 In the arm, it lies behind the brachial artery (Fig. 8.9a).
3 Leaves the brachial artery to enter the lower
triangular space to reach the oblique radial sulcus
on the back of humerus (Fig. 8.13a).
4 The nerve reaches the lateral side of arm 5 cm below
deltoid tuberosity, pierces lateral intermuscular
septum to enter the anterior compartment of arm on
its lateral aspect (Fig. 8.13a).
5 It descends down medial to the lateral epicondyle
into cubital fossa.
Radial nerve terminates by dividing into a superficial
and a deep branch (posterior interosseous nerve) just
below the level of lateral epicondyle. These are seen in
the cubital fossa (Fig. 8.18).
Fig. 8.22: Testing triceps brachii against resistance
Fig. 8.21: Transverse section through the arm a little below the insertion of the coracobrachialis and deltoid showing arrangement
of three heads of the triceps, and the radial nerve in the radial groove
--- Page 131 ---
UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
Relations
a. In the lower part of the axilla, radial nerve passes
downwards and has the following relations.
Anteriorly: Third part of the axillary artery (see Fig. 4.8).
Posteriorly: Subscapularis, latissimus dorsi and teres
major.
Laterally: Axillary nerve and coracobrachialis.
Medially: Axillary vein (see Fig. 4.9).
b. In the upper part of the arm, it continues behind the
brachial artery, and passes posterolaterally (with the
profunda brachii vessels) through the lower
triangular space, below the teres major, and between
the long head of the triceps brachii and the humerus.
It then enters the radial groove with the profunda
vessels (see Fig. 6.11).
c. In the radial groove, the nerve runs downwards and
laterally between the lateral and medial heads of the
triceps brachii, in contact with the humerus (Fig. 8.13a).
At the lower end of the groove, 5 cm below the deltoid
tuberosity, the nerve pierces the lateral intermuscular
septum and passes into the anterior compartment of
the arm (Fig. 8.17) to reach the cubital fossa where it
ends by dividing into superficial and deep branches.
Branches and Distribution
Various branches of radial nerve are shown in
Figs 8.23a–c.
Figs 8.23a and b: Distribution of right radial nerve
--- Page 132 ---
Upper Limb
Section 1
Figs 8.24a and b: Injury to radial nerve: (a) Saturday night
palsy, and (b) crutch paralysis
Muscular
1 Before entering the spiral groove, radial nerve supplies
the long and medial heads of the triceps brachii.
2 In the spiral groove, it supplies the lateral and medial
heads of the triceps brachii and the anconeus.
3 Below the radial groove, on the front of the arm, it
supplies the brachialis with proprioceptive fibres.
The brachioradialis and extensor carpi radialis
longus are supplied with motor fibres (Fig. 8.23a).
Cutaneous Branches
1 In the axilla, radial nerve gives off the posterior
cutaneous nerve of the arm which supplies the skin
on the back of the arm (see Fig. 7.1b).
2 In the radial groove, the radial nerve gives off the
lower lateral cutaneous nerves of the arm and the
posterior cutaneous nerve of the forearm.
Articular branches: The articular branches near the
elbow supply the elbow joint.
Competency achievement: The student should be able to:
AN 11.4 Describe the anatomical basis of Saturday night paralysis.7
AN 12.13 Describe the anatomical basis of wrist drop.8
CLINICAL ANATOMY
• The radial nerve is very commonly damaged in
the region of the radial (spiral) groove. The
common causes of injury are as follows.
a. Sleeping in an armchair with the limb hanging
by the side of the chair (Saturday night palsy),
Fig. 8.25: Wrist drop
or even the pressure of the crutch (crutch
paralysis) (Figs 8.24a and b).
b. Fractures of the shaft of the humerus. This
results in the weakness and loss of power of
extension at the wrist (wrist drop) (Fig. 8.25)
and sensory loss over a narrow strip on the back
of forearm, and on the lateral side of the dorsum
of the hand (Fig. 8.26).
• Wrist drop is quite disabling, because the patient
cannot grip any object firmly in the hand without
the synergistic action of the extensors.
Fig. 8.23c: Distribution of radial nerve (schematic)
--- Page 133 ---
UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
Mnemonics
Cubital fossa contents MBBR
From medial to lateral:
• Median nerve
• Brachial artery
• Tendon of Biceps
• Radial nerve
Biceps brachii muscle: Origins
“You walk shorter to a street corner. You ride longer
on a superhighway”
Short head originates from coracoid process.
Long head originates from the supraglenoid tubercle.
FACTS TO REMEMBER
• Medial root of median nerve crosses the axillary
artery in front to join lateral root to form the
median nerve.
• The order of structures from medial to lateral side
in the cubital fossa is median nerve, brachial artery,
tendon of biceps brachii and radial nerve.
• Triceps brachii is the only active extensor of elbow
joint. Gravity extends the joint passively.
• Biceps brachii is a strong supinator of the flexed
elbow, besides being its flexor.
CLINICOANATOMICAL PROBLEM
In a motorcycle accident, there was injury to the
middle of back of arm.
• What nerve is likely to be injured?
• What muscles are affected? Name five of them.
• What is the effect of injury?
Ans: Due to injury to the middle of back of arm, the
radial nerve gets injured. The muscles of arm affected
partially are lateral and medial heads of triceps
brachii. A part of muscle escapes paralysis as it gets
supplied in the axilla.
The other muscles affected are the extensors of
forearm. These are brachioradialis, extensor carpi
radialis longus and brevis, extensor digitorum and
extensor pollicis longus.
The effect of injury is ‘wrist drop’.
FURTHER READING
• Jayakumari S, Rath G, Arora J. Unilateral double axillary and
double brachial arteries. Embryological basis and clinical
implications. Int J Morph 2006;24(3):463–68.
PROFUNDA BRACHII ARTERY
Profunda brachii artery is a large branch, arising just
below the teres major. It accompanies the radial nerve
through the radial groove, and before piercing the
lateral intermuscular septum, it divides into the anterior
and posterior descending branches which take part in
the anastomoses around the elbow joint (Fig. 8.10).
Branches
1 The radial collateral (anterior descending) artery is one
of the terminal branches, and represents the
continuation of the profunda artery. It accompanies
the radial nerve, and ends by anastomosing with the
radial recurrent artery in front of the lateral
epicondyle of the humerus (Fig. 8.10).
2 The middle collateral (posterior descending) artery is the
largest terminal branch, which descends in the
substance of the medial head of the triceps. It ends
by anastomosing with the interosseous recurrent
artery, behind the lateral epicondyle of the humerus
(Fig. 8.10). It usually gives a branch which
accompanies the nerve to the anconeus.
3 The deltoid (ascending) branch ascends between the
long and lateral heads of the triceps, and
anastomoses with the descending branch of the
posterior circumflex humeral artery.
4 The nutrient artery to the humerus is often present. It
enters the bone in the radial groove just behind the
deltoid tuberosity. However, it may be remembered
that the main artery to the humerus is a branch of
the brachial artery.
Fig. 8.26: Sensory loss over back of forearm and dorsum of
hand
1–8 From Medical Council of India, Competency based Undergraduate Curriculum for the Indian Medical Graduate, 2018;1:44–80.
--- Page 134 ---
Upper Limb
Section 1
1. Which event does not occur at the insertion of
coracobrachialis?
a. Median nerve crosses brachial artery from the
lateral to the medial side
b. Ulnar nerve pierces medial intermuscular septum
c. Lateral cutaneous nerve of forearm pierces the
deep fascia
d. Radial nerve pierces lateral intermuscular septum
2. Interosseous recurrent artery is a branch of which
artery?
a. Ulnar
b. Common interosseous
c. Anterior interosseous
d. Posterior interosseous
3. Which nerve is felt behind medial epicondyle of
humerus?
a. Radial
b. Median
c. Musculocutaneous
d. Ulnar
4. Which of the following nerve injury leads to wrist
drop?
a. Ulnar
b. Radial
c. Median
d. Axillary
5. Lateral boundary of cubital fossa is formed by
which muscle?
a. Biceps brachii
b. Brachioradialis
c. Brachialis
d. Extensor carpi radialis
longus
6. Fracture of humerus at mid-shaft is likely to cause
injury to which of the following nerves?
a. Median
b. Radial
c. Ulnar
d. Musculocutaneous
7. Correct order of structures from medial side to
lateral side in cubital fossa is:
a. Median nerve, brachial artery, biceps tendon and
radial nerve
b. Median nerve, biceps tendon, radial nerve,
branchial artery
c. Median nerve, brachial artery, radial nerve and
biceps tendon
d. Brachial artery, median nerve, biceps tendon,
radial nerve
8. Which are the heads of triceps brachii muscle?
a. Long, medial and posterior
b. Long, lateral and medial
c. Long, lateral and posterior
d. Lateral, medial and posterior
• How many compartments are there in the upper
arm?
• Name the root value of musculocutaneous nerve.
1. Describe musculocutaneous nerve under following
headings:
a. Root value
b. Course
c. Branches
d. Relations
e. Clinical anatomy
2. Enumerate all the boundaries and contents of
cubital fossa. Give the clinical importance of the
fossa.
3. Write short notes on:
a. Changes at the level of insertion of coraco-
brachialis
b. Anastomoses around the elbow joint
c. Origin and insertion of triceps brachii muscle
d. Branches of deep branch of radial nerve. What
is the effect of its injury?
1. c
2. d
3. d
4. b
5. b
6. b
7. a
8. b
• Name the events occurring at the level of insertion
of coracobrachialis.
• What is name of its cutaneous branch?
--- Page 135 ---
UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
• Name the muscles supplied by musculocutaneous
nerve.
• Which muscle does coracobrachialis correspond to
in lower limb?
• Name the branches of brachial artery.
• What is the clinical importance of brachial artery?
• Name the nerves present on the medial side of
brachial artery in its course in upper part and in
lower part of arm.
• How is median nerve formed? Why is it called
median nerve?
• Name the branches of median nerve in the arm.
• Name the branches of radial nerve in the axilla.
• Which movement will be affected in paralysis of the
musculocutaneous nerve?
CUBITAL FOSSA
• What muscle forms lateral boundary of cubital fossa?
• What muscle forms its medial boundary?
• Enumerate the structures forming its roof.
• Name the muscles forming floor of the fossa.
• What are the main contents of the fossa?
• Name the branches of median nerve in the fossa.
• Name the branches of brachial artery in the fossa.
• Name the branches of radial nerve in the fossa.
• What is the clinical importance of bicipital
aponeurosis?
• What is clinical importance of cubital fossa?
• Name the heads of triceps brachii muscle and show
their origins and insertion.
• Name the regions through which radial nerve passes.
• Name the branches of radial nerve in all these regions.
• What is wrist drop?
• What is the course of profunda brachii artery? Name
its branches.
• What does word ‘profunda’ mean?
--- Page 136 ---
INTRODUCTION
Forearm extends between the elbow and the wrist
joints. Radius and ulna form its skeleton. These two
bones articulate at both their ends to form superior
and inferior radioulnar joints. Their shafts are kept at
optimal distance by the interosseous membrane.
Muscles accompanied by nerves and blood vessels are
present both on the front and the back of the forearm.
Hand is the most distal part of the upper limb, meant
for carrying out diverse activities. Numerous muscles,
tendons, bursae, blood vessels and nerves are
artistically placed and protected in this region.
SURFACE LANDMARKS OF FRONT OF FOREARM
1 The epicondyles of the humerus have been examined
(chapter 8). Note that medial epicondyle is more
prominent than the lateral (Fig. 9.1). The posterior
surface of the medial epicondyle is crossed by the
ulnar nerve which can be rolled under the palpating
finger. Pressure on the nerve produces tingling sensa-
tions on the medial side of the hand (see Fig. 8.13a).
2 The tendon of the biceps brachii can be felt in front of
the elbow. It can be made prominent by flexing the
elbow joint against resistance. Pulsations of the
brachial artery can be felt just medial to the tendon
(see Fig. 8.17).
3 The head of the radius can be palpated in a depression
on the posterolateral aspect of the extended elbow,
distal to the lateral epicondyle. Its rotation can be
felt during pronation and supination of the forearm.
4 The styloid process of the radius projects 1 cm lower
than the styloid process of the ulna (Fig. 9.51). It can
be felt in the upper part of the anatomical snuffbox.
Its tip is concealed by the tendons of the abductor
pollicis longus and the extensor pollicis brevis, which
must be relaxed during palpation.
Forearm and Hand
God gave you ears, eyes and hands. Use them on the patients in that order 
—William Kelsey
5 The head of the ulna forms a surface elevation on the
medial part of the posterior surface of the wrist
when the hand is pronated.
6 The styloid process of the ulna projects downwards
from the posteromedial aspect of the lower end of
the ulna. Its tip can be felt on the posteromedial
aspect of the wrist, where it lies about 1 cm above
the tip of the styloid process of the radius (Fig. 9.1).
7 The pisiform bone can be felt at the base of the
hypothenar eminence (medially) where the tendon
of the flexor carpi ulnaris terminates. It becomes
visible and easily palpable at the medial end of the
distal transverse crease (junction of forearm and
hand) when the wrist is fully extended.
8 The hook of the hamate lies one finger breadth below
the pisiform bone, in line with the ulnar border of
Fig. 9.1: Surface landmarks—front of forearm and hand
--- Page 137 ---
UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
the ring finger. It can be felt only on deep palpation
through the hypothenar muscles.
9 The tubercle of the scaphoid lies beneath the lateral
part of the distal transverse crease in an extended
wrist. It can be felt at the base of the thenar eminence
in a depression just lateral to the tendon of the flexor
carpi radialis (Fig. 9.2).
10 The tubercle (crest) of the trapezium may be felt on deep
palpation inferolateral to the tubercle of the scaphoid.
11 The brachioradialis becomes prominent along the
lateral border of the forearm when the elbow is
flexed against resistance in the midprone position
of the hand.
12 The tendons of the flexor carpi radialis, palmaris longus,
and flexor carpi ulnaris can be identified on the front
of the wrist when the hand is flexed against
resistance. The tendons lie in the order stated, from
lateral to medial side (Figs 9.3a–c).
13 The pulsation of the radial artery can be felt in front
of the lower end of the radius just lateral to the
tendon of the flexor carpi radialis.
14 The pulsations of the ulnar artery can be felt by
careful palpation just lateral to the tendon of the
flexor carpi ulnaris. Here the ulnar nerve lies medial
to the artery.
15 The transverse creases in front of the wrist are
important landmarks. The proximal transverse
crease lies at the level of the wrist joint, and distal
crease corresponds to the proximal border of the
flexor retinaculum.
16 The median nerve is very superficial in position at
and above the wrist. It lies along the lateral edge of
the tendon of the palmaris longus at the middle of
the wrist.
Fig. 9.2: Surface landmarks: Wrist and palm
Fig. 9.3a: The superficial muscles of the front of the right forearm
Competency achievement: The student should be able to:
AN 12.1 Describe and demonstrate important muscle groups of
ventral forearm with attachments, nerve supply and actions.1
MUSCLES OF FRONT OF FOREARM
The muscles of the front of the forearm may be divided
into superficial and deep groups.
Components
The front of the forearm presents the following
components for study.
1 Eight muscles, five superficial and three deep.
2 Two arteries, radial and ulnar.
3 Three nerves, median, ulnar and radial.
These structures can be better understood by
reviewing the long bones of the upper limb and having
an articulated hand by the side.
--- Page 138 ---
FOREARM AND HAND
Upper Limb
Section 1
Fig. 9.3b: Dissection of cubital fossa, front of forearm and palm
Figs 9.3c and d: Superficial muscles of front of forearm
--- Page 139 ---
UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
SUPERFICIAL MUSCLES
There are five muscles in the superficial group. These
are the pronator teres, the flexor carpi radialis, the
palmaris longus, the flexor carpi ulnaris and the flexor
digitorum superficialis (Tables 9.1 and 9.2).
Common Flexor Origin
All the superficial flexors of the forearm have a common
origin from the front of the medial epicondyle of the
humerus. This is called the common flexor origin.
Additional Features of Superficial Muscles
1 Pronator teres: Pronator teres comprises a big humeral
and a smaller ulnar head. Between the two heads,
median nerve leaves the cubital fossa. Deep to the
two heads exits ulnar artery from cubital fossa into
the front of forearm. It forms medial boundary of
the cubital fossa. It is the pronator of forearm
(Figs 9.5a and 9.11).
2 Flexor carpi radialis: It passes through a separate deep
compartment of the flexor retinaculum.
Flexor carpi radialis gets inserted into anterior
aspects of bases of second and third metacarpal
bones.
Table 9.2: Nerve supply and actions of the superficial muscles
Muscle
Nerve supply
Actions
1. Pronator teres
Median nerve
Pronation of forearm
2. Flexor carpi radialis
Median nerve
Flexes and abducts hand at wrist joint
3. Palmaris longus
Median nerve
Flexes wrist joint
4. Flexor digitorum superficialis
Median nerve
Flexes middle phalanx of fingers and assists
(Figs 9.4 and 9.5)
in flexing proximal phalanx and wrist joint
5. Flexor carpi ulnaris
Ulnar nerve
Flexes and adducts the hand at the wrist joint
Table 9.1: Attachments of the superficial muscles
Muscle
Origin
Insertion
1. Pronator teres (Figs 9.3a–c)
Medial epicondyle of humerus and medial
Middle of lateral aspect of shaft of radius
margin of coronoid process
2. Flexor carpi radialis
Medial epicondyle of humerus
Bases of second and third metacarpal bones
3. Palmaris longus
Medial epicondyle of humerus
Flexor retinaculum and palmar aponeurosis
4. Flexor digitorum
superficialis
(Fig. 9.8)
• Humeroulnar head
Medial epicondyle of humerus; medial
Muscle divides into 4 tendons. Each tendon
border of coronoid process of ulna
divides into 2 slips which are inserted on
Radial head
Anterior oblique line of shaft of radius
sides of middle phalanx of 2nd to 5th digits
5. Flexor carpi ulnaris
(Figs 9.3b and d)
• Humeral head
Medial epicondyle of humerus
Pisiform bone; insertion prolonged to hook of
• Ulnar head
Medial aspect of olecranon process and
the hamate and base of fifth metacarpal bone
posterior border of ulna
(see Fig. 2.32b)
It is easily seen and is a guide to radial pulse which
lies lateral to the tendon (Fig. 9.5b).
3 Palmaris longus: Palmaris longus (vestigeal muscle)
continues as palmar aponeurosis into the palm to
protect the nerves and vessels there. Its tendon lies
superficial to flexor retinaculum.
4 Flexor carpi ulnaris: It is inserted into pisiform bone.
Pisiform is a sesamoid bone in this tendon.
5 Flexor digitorum superficialis: Flexor digitorum
superficialis comprises the humeroulnar and radial
heads. The two heads of the muscle are joined by a
fibrous arch. Median nerve and ulnar artery pass
downwards deep to the fibrous arch (Fig. 9.4).
DEEP MUSCLES
Deep muscles of the front of the forearm are the
flexor digitorum profundus, the flexor pollicis longus
and the pronator quadratus and are described in
Tables 9.3 and 9.4. Following are some other points of
importance about these muscles.
Additional Points about the Flexor Digitorum Profundus
1 It is the most powerful, and most bulky muscle of
the forearm. It forms the muscular elevation seen and
--- Page 140 ---
FOREARM AND HAND
Upper Limb
Section 1
2 The main gripping power of the hand is provided
by the flexor digitorum profundus.
3 The muscle is supplied by two different nerves. So it
is a hybrid muscle.
Additional Points about the Flexor Pollicis Longus
1 The anterior interosseous nerve and vessels descend
on the anterior surface of the interosseous membrane
between the flexor digitorum profundus and the
flexor pollicis longus (Fig. 9.5).
2 The tendon passes deep to the flexor retinaculum
between the opponens pollicis and the oblique head
of the adductor pollicis, to enter the fibrous flexor
sheath of the thumb. It lies in radial bursa (Fig. 9.7).
Competency achievement: The student should be able to:
AN 12.9 Identify and describe fibrous flexor sheaths, ulnar bursa,
radial bursa and digital synovial sheaths.2
Synovial Sheaths of Flexor Tendons
1 Common flexor synovial sheath (ulnar bursa): The long
flexor tendons of the fingers (flexor digitorum
superficialis and profundus) are enclosed in a
common synovial sheath while passing deep to the
flexor retinaculum (carpal tunnel). The sheath has a
parietal layer lining the walls of the carpal tunnel,
and a visceral layer closely applied to the tendons
(Fig. 9.7). From the arrangement of the sheath, it
appears that the synovial sac has been invaginated by
the tendons from its lateral side. The synovial sheath
extends upwards for 5.0 or 7.5 cm into the forearm
and downwards into the palm up to the middle of
the shafts of the metacarpal bones. It is important to
note that the lower medial end is continuous with
the digital synovial sheath of the little finger.
Fig. 9.4: Muscles, nerves and arteries seen in the forearm
felt on the posterior surface of the forearm medial to
the subcutaneous posterior border of the ulna
(Fig. 9.6).
Fig. 9.5a: Transverse section through the middle of forearm showing the compartments, nerves and arteries
--- Page 141 ---
UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
Table 9.3: Attachments of the deep muscles
Muscle
Origin
Insertion
1. Flexor digitorum
• Upper three-fourths of the anterior and
• The muscle forms 4 tendons for the medial 4 digits
profundus
medial surface of the shaft of ulna
which enter the palm by passing deep to the flexor
(composite or
• Upper three-fourths of the posterior
retinaculum in ulnar bursa and digital synovial sheaths
hybrid muscle)
border of ulna
• Opposite the proximal phalanx of the corresponding
(Fig. 9.6)
• Medial surface of the olecranon and
digit, the tendon perforates the tendon of the flexor
coronoid processes of ulna
digitorum superficialis (Fig. 9.8)
• Adjoining part of the anterior surface of
• Each tendon is inserted on the palmar surface of the
the interosseous membrane
base of the distal phalanx (Fig. 9.8)
2. Flexor pollicis
• Upper three-fourths of the anterior surface • The tendon enters the palm by passing deep to the
longus
of the shaft of radius (Fig. 9.6)
flexor retinaculum
• Adjoining part of the anterior surface of
• It is inserted into the palmar surface of the distal phalanx
the interosseous membrane
of the thumb
3. Pronator
Oblique ridge on the lower one-fourth of
• Superficial fibres into the lower one-fourth of the anterior
quadratus
anterior surface of the shaft of ulna, and
surface and the anterior border of the radius
the area medial to it (Fig. 9.6)
• Deep fibres into the triangular area above the ulnar notch
Fig. 9.5b: Transverse section passing just above wrist showing
arrangement of the structures in flexor (anterior) compartment
2 Synovial sheath of the tendon of flexor pollicis longus
(radial bursa): This sheath is separate. Superiorly,
it is coextensive with the common sheath and
inferiorly it extends up to the distal phalanx of the
thumb (Fig. 9.7).
3 Digital synovial sheaths: The sheaths enclose the flexor
tendons in the fingers and line the fibrous flexor
sheaths. The digital sheath of the little finger is
continuous with the ulnar bursa, and that of the
thumb with the radial bursa. However, the digital
sheaths of the index, middle and ring fingers are
separate and independent (Fig. 9.7).
Vincula Longa and Brevia
The vincula longa and brevia are synovial folds, which
connect the tendons to the phalanges. They transmit
Fig. 9.6: Deep muscles of front of forearm
vessels to the tendons (Fig. 9.8). These are the remnants
of mesotendon.
DISSECTION
The skin of the forearm has already been reflected on
each side. Cut through the superficial and deep fasciae
to expose the superficial muscles of the forearm.
--- Page 142 ---
FOREARM AND HAND
Upper Limb
Section 1
Superficial Muscles
Identify these five superficial muscles. These are from
lateral to medial side, pronator teres getting inserted into
middle of radius, flexor carpi radialis reaching till the wrist,
palmaris longus continuing with palmar aponeurosis,
Table 9.4: Nerve supply and actions of the deep muscles
Muscle
Nerve supply
Actions
1. Flexor digitorum
• Medial half by ulnar nerve
Flexor of distal phalanges after the flexor digitorum superficialis
profundus
• Lateral half by anterior
 has flexed the middle phalanges
(Fig. 9.6)
interosseous nerve (C8, T1)
Secondarily, it flexes the other joints of the fingers, and the
(branch of median nerve)
 wrist
It is the chief gripping muscle. It acts best when the wrist
is extended
2. Flexor pollicis
Anterior interosseous nerve
Flexes the distal phalanx of the thumb. Continued action
longus
may also flex the proximal joints crossed by the tendon
3. Pronator quadratus
Anterior interosseous nerve
Superficial fibres pronate the forearm
Deep fibres bind the lower ends of radius and ulna
flexor digitorum superficialis passing through the palm
and most medially the flexor carpi ulnaris getting inserted
into the pisiform bone (Figs 9.3a and b) (refer to BDC App).
Deep Muscles
Cut through the origin of superficial muscles of forearm
at the level of medial epicondyle of humerus and reflect
them distally. This will expose the three deep muscles,
e.g. flexor pollicis longus, flexor digitorum profundus
and pronator quadratus (refer to BDC App).
Competency achievement: The student should be able to:
AN 12.2 Identify and describe origin, course, relations, branches
(or tributaries), termination of important nerves and vessels of
forearm.3
ARTERIES OF FRONT OF FOREARM
Features
The most conspicuous arteries of the forearm are the
radial and ulnar arteries. However, they mainly supply
the hand through the deep and superficial palmar
arches. The arterial supply of the forearm is chiefly
derived from the common interosseous branch of the
ulnar artery, which divides into anterior and posterior
interosseous arteries. The posterior interosseous artery
is reinforced in the upper part and replaced in the lower
part by the anterior interosseous artery.
RADIAL ARTERY
Beginning, Course and Termination
Radial artery (Fig. 9.9) is the smaller terminal branch
of the brachial artery in the cubital fossa. It runs
downwards to the wrist with a lateral convexity. It
leaves the forearm by turning posteriorly and
entering the anatomical snuffbox. As compared to
the ulnar artery, it is quite superficial throughout its
whole course. Its distribution in the hand is described
later.
Fig. 9.8: The flexor tendons of a finger showing the vincula longa
and brevia
Fig. 9.7: The synovial sheaths of the flexor tendons, i.e. ulnar
bursa, radial bursa and digital synovial sheaths
--- Page 143 ---
UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
Fig. 9.10: The radial, median and ulnar nerves and vessels in
the forearm
Relations
1 Anteriorly: It is overlapped by the brachioradialis in
its upper part, but in the lower half, it is covered
only by skin, superficial and deep fasciae.
2 Posteriorly: It is related to the muscles attached to
anterior surface of radius, i.e. biceps brachii, flexor
pollicis longus, flexor digitorum superficialis and
pronator quadratus.
3 Medially: It is related to the pronator teres in the
upper one-third and the tendon of the flexor carpi
radialis in the lower two-thirds of its course
(Figs 9.9 and 9.10).
4 Laterally: Brachioradialis in the whole extent and the
radial nerve in the middle one-third.
5 The artery is accompanied by venae comitantes.
Branches in the Forearm
1 The radial recurrent artery arises just below the elbow,
runs upwards deep to the brachioradialis, and ends
by anastomosing with the radial collateral artery
(anterior branch of profunda brachii artery) in front
of the lateral epicondyle of the humerus (see Fig. 8.10).
2 Muscular branches are given to the lateral muscles of
the forearm.
3 The palmar carpal branch arises near the lower border
of the pronator quadratus, runs medially deep to the
flexor tendons, and ends by anastomosing with the
palmar carpal branch of the ulnar artery, in front of
the middle of the recurrent branch of the deep palmar
arch, to form a cruciform anastomosis. The palmar
carpal arch supplies bones and joints at the wrist.
4 Dorsal carpal branch. It forms dorsal carpal arch with
branch of ulnar artery.
5 The superficial palmar branch arises just before the
radial artery leaves the forearm by winding
backwards. The branch passes through the thenar
muscles, and ends by joining the terminal part of the
ulnar artery to complete the superficial palmar arch
(Fig. 9.20).
ULNAR ARTERY
Beginning, Course and Termination
Ulnar artery is the larger terminal branch of the brachial
artery, and begins in the cubital fossa (Fig. 9.10). The
artery runs obliquely downwards and medially in the
upper one-third of the forearm; but in the lower two-
thirds of the forearm its course is vertical (Fig. 9.4). It
Fig. 9.9: Muscles lying deep to the radial artery
--- Page 144 ---
FOREARM AND HAND
Upper Limb
Section 1
enters the palm by passing superficial to the flexor
retinaculum. Its distribution in the hand is described later.
Relations
1 Anteriorly: In its upper half, the artery is deep and is
covered by muscles arising from common flexor
origin and median nerve. The lower half of the artery
is superficial and is covered only by skin and fascia
(Fig. 9.4).
2 Posteriorly: It lies on brachialis and on the flexor
digitorum profundus.
3 Medially: It is related to the ulnar nerve, and to the
flexor carpi ulnaris (Fig. 9.11).
4 Laterally: It is related to the flexor digitorum
superficialis (Fig. 9.4) and median nerve.
5 The artery is accompanied by venae comitantes.
Branches
1 The anterior and posterior ulnar recurrent arteries
anastomose around the elbow. The smaller
anterior ulnar recurrent artery runs up and ends
by anastomosing with the inferior ulnar collateral
artery in front of the medial epicondyle. The larger
posterior ulnar recurrent artery arises lower than
the anterior and ends by anastomosing with the
superior ulnar collateral artery behind the medial
epicondyle (see Fig. 8.10).
2 The common interosseous artery (about 1 cm long)
arises just below the radial tuberosity. It passes
backwards to reach the upper border of the
interosseous membrane, and end by dividing into
the anterior and posterior interosseous arteries.
Fig. 9.11: Relations of the median nerve in right cubital fossa,
and its entry into the forearm
The anterior interosseous artery is the deepest artery
on the front of the forearm. It accompanies the
anterior interosseous nerve.
It descends on the surface of the interosseous
membrane between the flexor digitorum profundus
and the flexor pollicis longus (Fig. 9.5a).
It pierces the interosseous membrane at the
upper border of the pronator quadratus to enter
the extensor compartment.
The artery gives muscular branches to the deep
muscles of the front of the forearm, nutrient
branches to the radius and ulna and a median artery
which accompanies the median nerve.
Near its origin, the posterior interosseous artery
gives off the interosseous recurrent artery which
runs upwards, and ends by anastomosing with
middle collateral artery (posterior branch of
profunda brachii artery) behind the lateral
epicondyle. The posterior interosseous artery
passes through a gap above the interosseous
membrane to the back of forearm (Fig. 8.10).
3 Muscular branches supply the medial muscles of
the forearm.
4, 5 Palmar and dorsal carpal branches take part in the
anastomoses around the wrist joint. The palmar
carpal branch helps to form the palmar carpal arch.
The dorsal carpal branch arises just above the
pisiform bone, winds backwards deep to the
tendons, and ends in the dorsal carpal arch.
This arch is formed medially by the dorsal
carpal branch of the ulnar artery, and laterally by
the dorsal carpal branch of the radial artery.
DISSECTION
Having dissected the superficial and deep group of
muscles of the forearm, identify the terminal branches
of the brachial artery, e.g. ulnar and radial arteries and
their branches (refer to BDC App).
Radial artery follows the direction of the brachial
artery (Fig. 9.9) (refer to BDC App).
Ulnar artery passes obliquely deep to heads of
pronator teres and then runs vertically till the wrist.
Carefully look for common interosseous branch of
ulnar artery and its anterior and posterior branches.
NERVES OF FRONT OF FOREARM
Nerves of the front of the forearm are the median, ulnar
and radial nerves. The radial and ulnar nerves run along
the margins of the forearm, and are never crossed by the
corresponding vessels which gradually approach them.
The ulnar artery, while approaching the ulnar nerve, gets
crossed by the median nerve (Fig. 9.10).
--- Page 145 ---
UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
Fig. 9.12: Distribution of median nerve
MEDIAN NERVE
Median nerve is the main nerve of the front of the
forearm. It also supplies the muscles of thenar eminence
(Fig. 9.10).
The median nerve controls coarse movements of the
hand, as it supplies most of the long muscles of the front
of the forearm. It is, therefore, called the ‘labourer’s
nerve’.
Course
Median nerve lies medial to brachial artery and enters
the cubital fossa. It is the most medial content of cubital
fossa (Fig. 9.11). Then it enters the forearm to lie
between flexor digitorum superficialis and flexor
digitorum profundus. It lies adherent to the back of
superficialis muscle (Fig. 9.5). Then it reaches down the
region of wrist where it lies deep and lateral to palmaris
longus tendon (Fig. 9.10). Lastly, it passes deep to flexor
retinaculum through carpal tunnel to enter the palm
(Fig. 9.12).
Relations
1 In the cubital fossa, median nerve lies medial to the
brachial artery, behind the bicipital aponeurosis, and
in front of the brachialis (see Fig. 8.17).
2 The median nerve enters the forearm by passing
between the two heads of the pronator teres. Here it
crosses the ulnar artery from which it is separated
by the deep head of the pronator teres (Fig. 9.11).
3 Along with the ulnar artery, the median nerve passes
beneath the fibrous arch of the flexor digitorum
superficialis, and runs deep to this muscle on the
surface of the flexor digitorum profundus. It is
accompanied by the median artery, a branch of the
anterior interosseous artery. About 5 cm above the
flexor retinaculum (wrist), it becomes superficial and
lies between the tendons of the flexor carpi radialis
(laterally) and the flexor digitorum superficialis
(medially). It is overlapped by the tendon of the
palmaris longus.
4 The median nerve enters the palm by passing
deep to the flexor retinaculum through the carpal
tunnel.
Branches
1 Muscular branches are given off in the cubital fossa to
flexor carpi radialis, palmaris longus and flexor
digitorum superficialis (Fig. 9.12).
2 The anterior interosseous branch is given off in the
upper part of the forearm. It supplies the flexor
pollicis longus, the lateral half of the flexor digitorum
profundus (giving rise to tendons for the index and
middle fingers) and the pronator quadratus. The
nerve also supplies the distal radioulnar and wrist
joints (Fig. 9.12).
3 The palmar cutaneous branch arises a short distance
above the flexor retinaculum, lies superficial to it and
supplies the skin over the thenar eminence and the
central part of the palm (see Fig. 7.1a).
4 Articular branches are given to the elbow joint and to
the proximal radioulnar joint.
5 Vascular branches supply the radial and ulnar arteries.
6 A communicating branch is given to the ulnar nerve.
ULNAR NERVE
The ulnar nerve is also known as the ‘musician’s nerve’
because it controls fine movements of the fingers. Its
course in the palm will be considered in the later part
of this chapter.
Course
Ulnar nerve is palpable as it lies behind medial
epicondyle of humerus and is not a content of cubital
fossa (Fig. 9.13). It enters the forearm by passing
--- Page 146 ---
FOREARM AND HAND
Upper Limb
Section 1
between two heads of flexor carpi ulnaris, i.e. cubital
tunnel, to lie along the lateral border of flexor carpi
ulnaris in the forearm. In the last phase, it courses
superficial to the flexor retinaculum, covered by its
superficial slip or volar carpal ligament to enter the
region of palm.
Relations
1 At the elbow, the ulnar nerve lies behind the medial
epicondyle of the humerus (Fig. 9.10). It enters the
forearm by passing between the two heads of the
flexor carpi ulnaris.
2 In the forearm, the ulnar nerve runs on the medial
part of the flexor digitorum profundus muscle.
3 At the wrist, the ulnar neurovascular bundle lies
between the flexor carpi ulnaris and the flexor
digitorum profundus. The bundle enters the palm
by passing superficial to the flexor retinaculum,
lateral to the pisiform bone (Fig. 9.13).
Branches
1 Muscular, to the flexor carpi ulnaris and the medial
half of the flexor digitorum profundus.
2 Palmar cutaneous branch arises in the middle of the
forearm and supplies the skin over the hypothenar
eminence (see Fig. 7.1a).
3 Dorsal cutaneous branch arises 7.5 cm above the
wrist, winds backwards and supplies the proximal
parts of the medial 2½ digits and the adjoining area
of the dorsum of the hand (see Fig. 7.1b).
4 Articular branches are given off to the elbow joint.
5 Its branches in the palm are shown in Figs 9.13 and
9.34.
RADIAL NERVE
Course
The radial nerve divides into its two terminal branches
in the cubital fossa just below the level of the lateral
epicondyle of the humerus (Fig. 9.10).
Branches
The deep terminal branch (posterior interosseous) soon
enters the back of the forearm by passing through the
supinator muscle. It will be studied further in back of
forearm as posterior interosseous nerve.
The superficial terminal branch (the main continuation
of the nerve) runs down in front of the forearm.
The superficial terminal branch of the radial nerve
is closely related to the radial artery only in the middle
one-third of the forearm (Fig. 9.10). It is purely cutaneous.
In the upper one-third, it is widely separated from
the artery, and in the lower one-third it passes
backwards under the tendon of the brachioradialis to
reach the anatomical snuffbox from where it is
distributed to the lateral half of the dorsum of the hand,
and to the proximal parts of the dorsal surfaces of the
thumb, the index finger, and lateral half of the middle
finger (see Fig. 7.1b).
Injury to this branch results in small area of sensory
loss over the root of the thumb.
DISSECTION
Median nerve is the chief nerve of the forearm. It enters
the forearm by passing between two heads of pronator
teres muscle. Its anterior interosseous branch is given
off as it is leaving the cubital fossa. Identify median
nerve stuck to the fascia on the deep surface of flexor
digitorum superficialis muscle. Thus, the nerve lies deep
to the flexor digitorum superficialis (Fig. 9.4).
Dissect the anterior interosseous nerve as it lies on
the interosseous membrane between flexor pollicis longus
and flexor digitorum profundus muscles (Fig. 9.5a).
Identify the ulnar nerve situated behind the medial
epicondyle. Trace it vertically down till the flexor
retinaculum (Figs 9.10 and 9.11) (refer to BDC App).
Fig. 9.13: Course and branches of ulnar nerve
--- Page 147 ---
UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
Trace the radial nerve and its two branches in the
lateral part of the cubital fossa. Its deep branch is mus-
cular and superficial branch is cutaneous (Fig. 9.11).
PALMAR ASPECT OF WRIST AND HAND
Features
The human hand is designed:
i. For grasping,
ii. For precise movements, and
iii. For serving as a tactile organ.
There is a big area in the motor cortex of brain for muscles
of hand.
The skin of the palm is:
i. Thick for protection of underlying tissues.
ii. Immobile because of its firm attachment to the
underlying palmar aponeurosis.
iii. Creased. All of these characters increase the
efficiency of the grip.
The skin is supplied by spinal nerves C6–C8
(see Fig. 7.1a) through the median and ulnar nerves.
The superficial fascia of the palm is made up of
dense fibrous bands which bind the skin to the deep
fascia (palmar aponeurosis) and divide the sub-
cutaneous fat into small tight compartments which
serve as water-cushions during firm gripping. The
fascia contains a subcutaneous muscle, the palmaris
brevis, which helps in improving the grip by steadying
the skin on the ulnar side of the hand. The superficial
metacarpal ligament which stretches across the roots
of the fingers over the digital vessels and nerves, is a
part of this fascia.
The deep fascia is specialised to form:
i. The flexor retinaculum at the wrist.
ii. The palmar aponeurosis in the palm.
iii. The fibrous flexor sheaths in the fingers.
All three form a continuous structure which holds
the tendons in position and thus increase the efficiency
of the grip.
DISSECTION
1. A horizontal incision at the distal crease of front of
the wrist has already been made.
2. Make a vertical incision from the centre of the above
incision through the palm to the centre of the middle
finger (Fig. 9.14).
3. Make one horizontal incision along the distal palmar
crease.
4. Make an oblique incision starting 3 cm distal to incision
no. 2 and extend it till the tip of the distal phalanx of
the thumb.
Thus the skin of the palm gets divided into
three areas. Reflect the skin of lateral and medial flaps
on their respective sides. The skin of the intermediate
flap is reflected distally towards the distal palmar crease.
Further the skin of middle finger is to be reflected on
either side.
Superficial fascia and deep fascia
Remove the superficial fascia to clean the underlying
deep fascia.
Deep fascia is modified to form the flexor retinaculum
at wrist, palmar aponeurosis in the palm, and fibrous
flexor sheaths in the digits. Identify the structures on its
superficial surface. Divide the flexor retinaculum
between the thenar and hypothenar eminences,
carefully preserving the underlying median nerve and
long flexor tendons (refer to BDC App).
Identify long flexor tendons enveloped in their
synovial sheaths including the digital synovial sheaths.
Competency achievement: The student should be able to:
AN 12.3 Identify and describe flexor retinaculum with its
attachments.4
Flexor Retinaculum
Flexor retinaculum (Latin to hold back) is a strong fibrous
band which bridges the anterior concavity of the carpus
and converts it into a tunnel, the carpal tunnel (Fig. 9.15).
Attachments
Medially, to:
1 The pisiform bone, and
2 The hook of the hamate.
Laterally, to:
1 The tubercle of the scaphoid, and
2 The crest of the trapezium.
Fig. 9.14: Incisions of palm and digits (1–4)
--- Page 148 ---
FOREARM AND HAND
Upper Limb
Section 1
On either side, the retinaculum has a slip:
1 The lateral deep slip is attached to the medial lip of the
groove on the trapezium which is thus converted into
a tunnel for the tendon of the flexor carpi radialis.
2 The medial superficial slip (volar carpal ligament) is also
attached to the pisiform bone. The ulnar vessels and
nerves pass deep to this slip (Fig. 9.15).
Relations
The structures passing superficial to the flexor retina-
culum are:
i. The palmar cutaneous branch of the median nerve
(Fig. 9.16).
ii. The tendon of the palmaris longus.
iii. The palmar cutaneous branch of the ulnar nerve.
iv. The ulnar vessels.
v. The ulnar nerve.
The thenar and hypothenar muscles arise from the
retinaculum (Fig. 9.15).
The structures passing deep to the flexor retinaculum
are:
i. The median nerve (Fig. 9.15).
ii. Four tendons of the flexor digitorum superficialis.
iii. Four tendons of the flexor digitorum profundus.
iv. The tendon of the flexor pollicis longus.
v. The ulnar bursa.
vi. The radial bursa.
vii. The tendon of the flexor carpi radialis lies between
the retinaculum and its deep slip, in the groove
on the trapezium (Fig. 9.15).
Palmar Aponeurosis
This term is often used for the entire deep fascia of the
palm. However, it is better to restrict this term
to the central part of the deep fascia of the palm which
covers the superficial palmar arch, the long flexor
tendons, the terminal part of the median nerve, and
the superficial branch of the ulnar nerve (Fig. 9.16).
Features
Palmar aponeurosis is triangular in shape. The apex
which is proximal, blends with the flexor retinaculum
Fig. 9.15: Flexor retinaculum with its relations (schematic). Sca: scaphoid; Lun: lunate; Tri: triquetral; Pi: pisiform; Tra: trapezium;
Trz: trapezoid; Cap: Capitate; Ham: hamate
Fig. 9.16: The deep fascia of the hand forming the flexor
retinaculum, palmar aponeurosis and fibrous flexor sheaths
--- Page 149 ---
UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
and is continuous with the tendon of the palmaris
longus. The base is directed distally. It divides into
superficial and deep strata, superficial is attached to
dermis. Deep strata divides into four slips opposite the
heads of the metacarpals of the medial four digits. Each
slip divides into two parts which are continuous with
the fibrous flexor sheaths. Extensions pass to the deep
transverse metacarpal ligament, the capsule of the
metacarpophalangeal joints and the sides of the base
of the proximal phalanx. The digital vessels and nerves,
and the tendons of the lumbricals emerge through the
intervals between the slips. From the lateral and medial
margins of the palmar aponeurosis, the lateral and
medial palmar septa pass backwards and divide the palm
into compartments.
Functions
Palmar aponeurosis fixes the skin of the palm and thus
improves the grip. It also protects the underlying
tendons, vessels and nerves.
Fibrous Flexor Sheaths of the Fingers
The fibrous flexor sheaths are made up of the deep
fascia of the fingers. The fascia is thick and arched. It is
attached to the sides of the phalanges and across the
base of the distal phalanx. Proximally, it is continuous
with a slip of the palmar aponeurosis.
In this way, a blind osseofascial tunnel is formed
which contains the long flexor tendons enclosed in the
digital synovial sheath (Figs 9.17a–c). The fibrous
sheath is thick opposite the phalanges and thin opposite
the joints to permit flexion.
The sheath holds the tendons in position during
flexion of the digits.
CLINICAL ANATOMY
Dupuytren’s contracture: This condition is due to
inflammation involving the ulnar side of the palmar
aponeurosis. There is thickening and contraction of
the aponeurosis. As a result, the proximal phalanx
and later the middle phalanx become flexed and
cannot be straightened. The terminal phalanx
remains unaffected. The ring finger is most commonly
involved (Fig. 9.18).
Fig. 9.18: Dupuytren’s contracture
Figs 9.17a to c: The fibrous flexor sheath and its contents: (a) Bony attachments of the sheath and of the flexor tendons, (b) the
fibrous sheath showing transverse fibres in front of the bones and cruciate fibres in front of joints, and (c) the flexor tendons after
removal of the sheath
--- Page 150 ---
FOREARM AND HAND
Upper Limb
Section 1
INTRINSIC MUSCLES OF HAND
Features
The intrinsic muscles of the hand serve the function of
adjusting the hand during gripping and also for carrying
out fine skilled movements. Their attachments, nerve
supply and actions are given in Tables 9.5 and 9.6.
There are 20 muscles in the hand. These are:
1 a. Three muscles of thenar eminence
i. Abductor pollicis brevis (Fig. 9.19)
ii. Flexor pollicis brevis
iii. Opponens pollicis
b. One adductor of thumb: Adductor pollicis.
2 Four hypothenar muscles
i. Palmaris brevis
ii. Abductor digiti minimi
iii. Flexor digiti minimi (Fig. 9.20)
iv. Opponens digiti minimi (Fig. 9.22)
Muscles (ii) to (iv) are muscles of hypothenar eminence.
3 Four lumbricals (Fig. 9.21)
4 Four palmar interossei (Figs 9.23, 9.24b and c)
5 Four dorsal interossei (Figs 9.23, 9.24a and c)
These muscles are described in Tables 9.5 and 9.6.
Actions of Thenar Muscles
In studying the actions of the thenar muscles, it must
be remembered that the movements of the thumb take
place in planes at right angles to those of the other digits
because the thumb (first metacarpal) is rotated medially
through 90°. Flexion and extension of the thumb take
place in the plane of the palm; while abduction and
adduction at right angles to the plane of palm.
Movement of the thumb across the palm to touch the
other digits is known as ‘opposition’. This movement
is a combination of flexion and medial rotation.
Actions of Dorsal Interossei
All dorsal interossei cause abduction of the digits away
from the line of the middle finger. This movement
occurs in the plane of palm (Fig. 9.25) in contrast to the
movement of thumb where abduction occurs at right
angles to the plane of palm (Fig. 9.26). Note that
movement of the middle finger to either medial or
lateral side constitutes abduction. Also note that the
first and fifth digits do not require dorsal interossei as
they have their own abductors.
Testing of Some Intrinsic Muscles
a. Pen/pencil test for abductor pollicis brevis: Lay the hand
flat on a table with the palm directed upwards. The
patient is unable to touch with his thumb a pen/
pencil held in front of the palm (Fig. 9.27).
b. Test for opponens pollicis: Request the patient to touch
the proximal phalanx of 2nd to 5th digits with the
tip of thumb.
Fig. 9.19: The origin and insertion of the thenar and hypothenar muscles
--- Page 151 ---
UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
Fig. 9.20: Anterior view of right palm. Palmar aponeurosis and greater part of flexor retinaculum have been removed to display
superficial palmar arch, ulnar nerve and median nerve, two muscles each of thenar and hypothenar eminences
Fig. 9.21: The origin of the lumbrical muscles from tendons of flexor digitorum profundus
--- Page 152 ---
FOREARM AND HAND
Upper Limb
Section 1
Fig. 9.22: Deep palmar arch, deep branch of ulnar nerve, adductor pollicis and opponens muscles
Fig. 9.23: Palmar and dorsal interossei muscles
--- Page 153 ---
UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
Competency achievement: The student should be able to:
AN 12.5 Identify and describe small muscles of hand. Also describe movements of thumb and muscles involved.5
Table 9.5: Attachments of small muscles of the hand
Name
Origin
Insertion
Muscles of thenar eminence
Abductor pollicis brevis
Tubercle of scaphoid, crest of trapezium,
Base of proximal phalanx of thumb
(Fig. 9.20)
flexor retinaculum
Flexor pollicis brevis
Flexor retinaculum, crest of trapezium and
Base of proximal phalanx of thumb
capitate bones
Opponens pollicis (Fig. 9.22)
Flexor retinaculum crest of trapezium
Lateral half of palmar surface of the
shaft of metacarpal bone of thumb
Adductor of thumb
Adductor pollicis
Oblique head: Bases of 2nd–3rd metacarpals;
Base of proximal phalanx of thumb
transverse head: Shaft of 3rd metacarpal
on its medial aspect
Muscle of medial side of palm
Palmaris brevis
Flexor retinaculum
Skin of palm on medial side
Muscles of hypothenar eminence
Abductor digiti minimi
Pisiform bone
Base of proximal phalanx of little finger
Flexor digiti minimi
Flexor retinaculum
Base of proximal phalanx of little finger
Opponens digiti minimi
Flexor retinaculum
Medial border of fifth metacarpal bone
Lumbricals (Fig. 9.21)
Lumbricals (4)
Lateral side of tendon of flexor
Via extensor expansion into dorsum
Arise from 4 tendons of flexor
digitorum profundus of 2nd digit
of bases of distal phalanges
digitorum profundus
Lateral side of same tendon of 3rd digit
Adjacent sides of same tendons of 3rd and
4th digits
Adjacent sides of same tendons of 4th and
5th digits
(Contd...)
Figs 9.24a–c: (a) The dorsal interossei muscles, (b) palmar interossei muscles, and (c) dorsal and palmar interossei
--- Page 154 ---
FOREARM AND HAND
Upper Limb
Section 1
Table 9.6: Nerve supply and actions of small muscles of the hand
Muscle
Nerve supply
Actions
Muscles of thenar eminence
Abductor pollicis brevis (Fig. 9.20)
Median nerve
Abduction of thumb
Flexor pollicis brevis
Median nerve
Flexes metacarpophalangeal joint of thumb
Opponens pollicis (Fig. 9.22)
Median nerve
Pulls thumb medially and forward across palm
(opposes thumb towards the fingers)
Adductor of thumb
Adductor pollicis
Deep branch of ulnar nerve which
Adduction of thumb
ends in this muscle
Muscle of medial side of palm
Palmaris brevis
Superficial branch of ulnar nerve
Wrinkles skin to improve grip of palm
Muscles of hypothenar eminence
Abductor digiti minimi
Deep branch of ulnar nerve
Abducts little finger
Flexor digiti minimi
Deep branch of ulnar nerve
Flexes little finger
Opponens digiti minimi
Deep branch of ulnar nerve
Pulls fifth metacarpal forward as in cupping the
palm
Lumbricals (Fig. 9.21)
Lumbricals (4)
First and second, i.e. lateral two by
Flex metacarpophalangeal joints, extend
median nerve; third and fourth by
interphalangeal joints of 2nd–5th digits
deep branch of ulnar nerve
Palmar interossei
Palmar (4) (Fig. 9.24b)
Deep branch of ulnar nerve
Palmar interossei adduct fingers towards centre
of third digit or middle finger
Dorsal interossei
Dorsal (4) (Figs 9.23 and
Deep branch of ulnar nerve
Dorsal interossei abduct fingers from centre of third
9.24a and c)
digit. Both palmar and dorsal interossei flex the
metacarpophalangeal joints and extend the
interphalangeal joints
c. The dorsal interossei are tested by asking the subject
to spread out the fingers against resistance. As index
finger is abducted one feels 1st dorsal interosseous
(Fig. 9.28).
d. The palmar interossei and adductor pollicis are tested
by placing a piece of paper between the fingers
(Fig. 9.29), between thumb and index finger and
seeing how firmly it can be held (Fig. 9.30).
e. Froment’s sign, or the book test which tests the
adductor pollicis muscle. When the patient is asked
to grasp a book firmly between the thumbs and
other fingers of both the hands, the terminal
phalanx of the thumb on the paralysed side becomes
flexed at the interphalangeal joint (by the flexor
pollicis longus which is supplied by the median
nerve) (Fig. 9.31).
Table 9.5: Attachments of small muscles of the hand (Contd...)
Name
Origin
Insertion
Palmar interossei
Palmar (4)
Medial side of base of 1st metacarpal
Medial side of base of proximal
(Figs 9.24b and c)
phalanx of thumb or 1st digit
Medial side of shaft of 2nd metacarpal
Via extensor expansion into dorsum
Lateral side of shaft of 4th metacarpal
of bases of distal phalanges of 2nd,
Lateral side of shaft of 5th metacarpal
4th and 5th digits (Fig. 9.53)
Dorsal interossei
Dorsal (4)
Adjacent sides of shafts of 1st and 2nd MC
Via extensor expansion into dorsum
(Figs 9.24a and c)
Adjacent sides of shafts of 2nd and 3rd MC
of bases of distal phalanges of 2nd,
Adjacent sides of shafts of 3rd and 4th MC
3rd, 3rd and 4th digits
Adjacent sides of shafts of 4th and 5th MC
MC: Metacarpal
--- Page 155 ---
UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
Fig. 9.28: Testing first dorsal interosseous muscle of hand
Fig. 9.26: The planes of movements of the thumb
Fig. 9.25: The planes of movements of the fingers
f. The lumbricals and interossei are tested by asking
the subject to flex the fingers at the metacarpo-
phalangeal joints against resistance.
Fig. 9.27: Pen test for abductor pollicis brevis
Fig. 9.31: Froment’s test
Fig. 9.30: Testing adductor pollicis
Fig. 9.29: Test for palmar interossei
--- Page 156 ---
FOREARM AND HAND
Upper Limb
Section 1
Competency achievement: The student should be able to:
AN 12.7 Identify and describe course and branches of important
blood vessels and nerves in hand.6
ARTERIES OF HAND
Features
Arteries of the hand are the terminal parts of the ulnar
and radial arteries. Branches of these arteries unite and
form anastomotic channels called the superficial and
deep palmar arches.
ULNAR ARTERY
The course of this artery in the forearm has been described
earlier. It enters the palm by passing superficial to the
flexor retinaculum but deep to volar carpal ligament
(Fig. 9.15). It ends by dividing into the superficial palmar
branch, which is the main continuation of the artery, and
the deep palmar branch. These branches take part in the
formation of the superficial palmar arch and deep palmar
arch, respectively.
Superficial Palmar Arch
The arch represents an important anastomosis between
the ulnar and radial arteries.
The convexity of the arch is directed towards the
fingers, and its most distal point is situated at the level
of the distal border of the fully extended thumb.
Formation
The superficial palmar arch is formed as the direct
continuation of the ulnar artery beyond the flexor
retinaculum, i.e. by the superficial palmar branch. On
the lateral side, the arch is completed by superficial
palmar branch of radial artery (Fig. 9.32).
Relations
The superficial palmar arch lies deep to the palmaris brevis
and the palmar aponeurosis. It crosses the palm over the
flexor digiti minimi, the flexor tendons of the fingers, the
lumbricals, and the digital branches of the median nerve.
Branches
Superficial palmar arch gives off three common digital
and one proper digital branches which supply the
medial 3½ digits. The lateral three common digital
branches are joined by the corresponding palmar
metacarpal arteries from the deep palmar arch.
The deep branch of the ulnar artery arises in front of
the flexor retinaculum immediately beyond the
pisiform bone. Soon it passes between the flexor and
abductor digiti minimi to join and complete the deep
palmar arch.
DISSECTION
Clean the thenar and hypothenar muscles. Carefully
preserve the median nerve and superficial and deep
branches of ulnar nerve which supply these muscles.
Abductor pollicis brevis is the lateral muscle; flexor
pollicis brevis is the medial one. Both these form the
superficial lamina. The deeper lamina is constituted by
opponens pollicis (Figs 9.19 to 9.22).
Cut through the abductor pollicis brevis and flexor
pollicis brevis to expose the opponens pollicis. These
three muscles constitute the muscles of thenar
eminence.
Incise flexor pollicis brevis in its centre and reflect
its two parts. This will reveal the tendon of flexor pollicis
longus and adductor pollicis on a deeper plane. The
three muscles of thenar eminence are supplied by thick
recurrent branch of median nerve (Figs 9.20 and 9.22).
On the medial side of hand, identify thin palmaris
brevis muscle in the superficial fascia. It receives a twig
from the superficial branch of ulnar nerve.
Hypothenar eminence is comprised by abductor digiti
minimi medially, flexor digiti minimi just lateral to it. Deep
to both these lies opponens digiti minimi. Identify these
three muscles and trace their nerve supply from deep
branch of ulnar nerve (refer to BDC App).
Between the two eminences of the palm, deep to
palmar aponeurosis, identify the superficial palmar arch
formed mainly by superficial branch of ulnar and
superficial palmar branch of radial artery. Identify its
common and proper digital branches.
Clean, dissect and preserve the branches of the
median nerve and superficial division of ulnar nerve in
the palm lying between the superficial palmar arch and
long flexor tendons (Fig. 9.20).
Lying on a deeper plane are the tendons of flexor
digitorum superficialis muscle. Dissect the peculiar
mode of its insertion in relation to that of tendon of flexor
digitorum profundus (Fig. 9.21).
Cut through the tendons of flexor digitorum super-
ficialis 5 cm above the wrist. Divide both ends of
superficial palmar arch. Reflect them distally towards
the metacarpophalangeal joints.
Identify four tendons of flexor digitorum profundus
diverging in the palm with four delicate muscles, the
lumbricals, arising from them. Dissect the nerve supply
to these lumbricals. The first and second are supplied
from median and third and fourth from the deep branch
of ulnar nerve (Fig. 9.21).
Divide the flexor digitorum profundus 5 cm above
the wrist and reflect it towards the metacarpophalangeal
joints. Trace one of its tendons to its insertion into the
base of distal phalanx of one finger (refer to BDC App).
--- Page 157 ---
UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
Relations
1 It leaves the forearm by winding backwards round
the wrist.
2 It passes through the anatomical snuffbox where it
lies deep to the tendons of the abductor pollicis
longus, the extensor pollicis brevis and the extensor
pollicis longus.
It is also crossed by the digital branches of the radial
nerve.
The artery is superficial to the lateral ligament of the
wrist joint, the scaphoid and the trapezium.
3 It reaches the proximal end of the first interosseous
space and passes between the two heads of the first
dorsal interosseous muscle to reach the palm.
4 In the palm, the radial artery runs medially. At first
it lies deep to the oblique head of the adductor
pollicis, and then passes between the two heads of
this muscle to form deep palmar arch. Therefore, it
is known as the deep palmar arch (Fig. 9.33).
Branches
Dorsum of hand: On the dorsum of the hand, the radial
artery gives off:
1 A branch to the lateral side of the dorsum of the thumb.
2 The first dorsal metacarpal artery. This artery arises just
before the radial artery passes into the interval
between the two heads of the first dorsal interosseous
CLINICAL ANATOMY
The radial artery is used for feeling the (arterial) pulse
at the wrist. The pulsations can be felt well in this
situation because of the presence of the flat radius
with pronator quadratus muscle behind the artery
(Fig. 9.10).
RADIAL ARTERY
In this part of its course, the radial artery runs obliquely
downwards, and backwards deep to the tendons of the
abductor pollicis longus, the extensor pollicis brevis,
and the extensor pollicis longus, and superficial to the
lateral ligament of the wrist joint (Fig. 9.52a). Thus it
passes through the anatomical snuffbox to reach the
proximal end of the first interosseous space. Further, it
passes between the two heads of the first dorsal
interosseous muscle and between the two heads of
adductor pollicis to form the deep palmar arch in the
palm (Fig. 9.33).
Course
Radial artery runs obliquely from the site of ‘radial
pulse’ to reach the anatomical snuffbox. From there, it
passes forwards to reach first interosseous space and
then into the palm.
Fig. 9.32: The superficial and deep palmar arches
--- Page 158 ---
FOREARM AND HAND
Upper Limb
Section 1
muscle. It at once divides into two branches for the
adjacent sides of the thumb and the index finger.
Palm: In the palm (deep to the oblique head of the
adductor pollicis), the radial artery gives off:
1 The princeps pollicis artery which divides at the base
of the proximal phalanx into two branches for the
palmar surface of the thumb (Fig. 9.33).
2 The radialis indicis artery descends between the first
dorsal interosseous muscle and the transverse head
of the adductor pollicis to supply the lateral side of
the index finger.
Deep Palmar Arch
Deep palmar arch provides a second channel connecting
the radial and ulnar arteries in the palm (the first one
being the superficial palmar arch already considered). It
is situated deep to the long flexor tendons.
Formation
The deep palmar arch is formed mainly by the terminal
part of the radial artery, and is completed medially at
the base of the fifth metacarpal bone by the deep palmar
branch of the ulnar artery (Fig. 9.32).
Relations
The arch lies on the proximal parts of the shafts of the
metacarpals, and on the interossei; under the cover of
the oblique head of the adductor pollicis, the flexor
tendons of the fingers, and the lumbricals.
The deep branch of the ulnar nerve lies within the
concavity of the arch.
Branches
1 From its convexity, i.e. from its distal side, the arch
gives off three palmar metacarpal arteries, which run
distally in the 2nd, 3rd and 4th spaces, supply the
medial four metacarpals, and terminate at the finger
clefts by joining the common digital branches of the
superficial palmar arch (Fig. 9.32).
2 Dorsally, the arch gives off three (proximal)
perforating digital arteries which pass through the
medial three interosseous spaces to anastomose with
the dorsal metacarpal arteries.
The digital perforating arteries connect the palmar
digital branches of the superficial palmar arch with
the dorsal metacarpal arteries.
3 Recurrent branch arises from the concavity of the arch
and passes proximally to supply the carpal bones
and joints, and ends in the palmar carpal arch.
DISSECTION
Deep to the lateral two tendons of flexor digitorum
profundus muscle, note an obliquely placed muscle
extending from two origins, i.e. from the shaft of the
third metacarpal bone and the bases of 2nd and 3rd
metacarpal bones and adjacent carpal bones to the
base of proximal phalanx of the thumb. This is adductor
Fig. 9.33: Course of radial artery (schematic)
--- Page 159 ---
UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
pollicis (Fig. 9.22). Reflect the adductor pollicis muscle
from its origin towards its insertion.
Identify the deeply placed interossei muscles. Identify
the radial artery entering the palm between two heads
of first dorsal interosseous muscle and then between
two heads of adductor pollicis muscle turning medially
to join the deep branch of ulnar artery to complete the
deep palmar arch (Fig. 9.32). Identify the deep branch
of ulnar nerve lying in its concavity. Carefully preserve
it, including its multiple branches. Deep branch of ulnar
nerve ends by supplying the adductor pollicis muscle.
It may supply deep head of flexor pollicis brevis also.
Lastly, define four small palmar interossei and
four relatively bigger dorsal interossei muscles (Figs 9.23
and 9.24a–c) (refer to BDC App).
NERVES OF HAND
ULNAR NERVE
Ulnar nerve is the main nerve of the hand (like the
lateral plantar nerve in the foot).
Course
Ulnar nerve lies superficial to flexor retinaculum,
covered only by the superficial slip of the retinaculum
(volar carpal ligament—Fig. 9.15). It terminates by
dividing into a superficial and a deep branch.
Superficial branch is cutaneous. The deep branch
passes through the muscles of the hypothenar eminence
to lie in the concavity of the deep palmar arch to end in
the adductor pollicis (Fig. 9.22).
Relations
1 The ulnar nerve enters the palm by passing
superficial to the flexor retinaculum where it lies
between the pisiform bone and the ulnar vessels.
Here the nerve divides into its superficial and deep
terminal branches (Figs 9.13).
2 The superficial terminal branch supplies the palmaris
brevis and divides into two digital branches for the
medial 1½ fingers (Fig. 9.34a).
3 The deep terminal branch accompanies the deep
branch of the ulnar artery. It passes backwards
between the abductor and flexor digiti minimi, and
then between the opponens digiti minimi and the
fifth metacarpal bone, lying on the hook of the
hamate.
Finally, it turns laterally within the concavity of the
deep palmar arch. It ends by supplying the adductor
pollicis muscle (Fig. 9.22).
Branches
From Superficial Terminal Branch
1 Muscular branch: To palmaris brevis.
2 Cutaneous branches: Two palmar digital nerves
supply the medial 1½ fingers with their nail beds
(Fig. 9.34a).
The medial branch supplies the medial side of the
little finger.
The lateral branch is a common palmar digital nerve.
It divides into two proper palmar digital nerves for the
adjoining sides of the ring and little fingers.
The common palmar digital nerve communicates
with the median nerve.
Figs 9.34a and b: Distribution of the branches of the ulnar nerve
--- Page 160 ---
FOREARM AND HAND
Upper Limb
Section 1
From Deep Terminal Branch
1 Muscular branches:
a. At its origin, the deep branch supplies three muscles
of hypothenar eminence (Fig. 9.34b).
b. As the nerve crosses the palm, it supplies the
medial two lumbricals and eight interossei.
c. The deep branch terminates by supplying the
adductor pollicis, and occasionally the deep head
of the flexor pollicis brevis.
2 An articular branch supplies the wrist joint.
CLINICAL ANATOMY
• The ulnar nerve is also known as the ‘musician’s
nerve’ because it controls fine movements of the
fingers (Fig. 9.34a).
• The ulnar nerve is commonly injured at the elbow,
behind the medial epicondyle or distal to elbow
as it passes between two heads of flexor carpi
ulnaris (cubital tunnel) or at the wrist in front of
the flexor retinaculum.
Ulnar nerve injury at the elbow: Flexor carpi ulnaris
and the medial half of the flexor digitorum
profundus are paralysed.
• Due to this paralysis, the medial border of the
forearm becomes flattened. An attempt to produce
flexion at the wrist results in abduction of the
hand. The tendon of the flexor carpi ulnaris does
not tighten on making a fist. Flexion of the
terminal phalanges of the ring and little fingers is
lost.
• The ulnar nerve controls fine movements of the
fingers through its extensive motor distribution
to the short muscles of the hand. There is ulnar
claw hand as well.
Ulnar nerve lesion at the wrist: Produces ‘ulnar claw-
hand’.
• Ulnar claw hand is characterised by the following
signs.
a. Hyperextension at the metacarpophalangeal
joints and flexion at the interphalangeal joints,
involving the ring and little fingers—more than
the index and middle fingers (Fig. 9.35). The
intermetacarpal spaces are hollowed out due
to wasting of the interosseous muscles. Claw
hand deformity is more obvious in wrist lesions
as the profundus muscle is spared: This causes
marked flexion of the terminal phalanges (action
of paradox) (see p 197).
b. Sensory loss is confined to the medial one-third
of the palm and the medial 1½ fingers including
their nail beds (Figs 9.36a and b). Medial half of
dorsum of hand also shows sensory loss.
c. Vasomotor changes: The skin areas with sensory
loss is warmer due to arteriolar dilatation; it is
also drier due to absence of sweating because
of loss of sympathetic supply.
d. Trophic changes: Long-standing cases of
paralysis lead to dry and scaly skin. The nails
crack easily with atrophy of the pulp of fingers.
e. The patient is unable to spread out the fingers
due to paralysis of the dorsal interossei. The
power of adduction of the thumb, and flexion
of the ring and little fingers are lost. It should
be noted that median nerve lesions are more
disabling. In contrast, ulnar nerve lesions leave
a relatively efficient hand.
Fig. 9.35: Clawing of ring and little fingers
Figs 9.36a and b: Sensory loss on: (a) Palmar aspect, and
(b) dorsal aspect of hand in ulnar nerve injury
--- Page 161 ---
UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
Fig. 9.37: Distribution of the median nerve in the hand. The main divisions of the ulnar nerve are also shown
MEDIAN NERVE
The median nerve is important because of its role in
controlling the movements of the thumb which are
crucial in the mechanism of gripping by the hand.
Course
Median nerve lies deep to flexor retinaculum in the
carpal tunnel and enters the palm (Fig. 9.20). Soon it
terminates by dividing into muscular and cutaneous
branches.
Relations
1 The median nerve enters the palm by passing deep
to the flexor retinaculum where it lies in the narrow
space of the carpal tunnel in front of the ulnar bursa
enclosing the flexor tendons.
Immediately, below the retinaculum, the nerve
divides into lateral and medial divisions (Fig. 9.20).
2 The lateral division gives off a muscular branch to
the thenar muscles, and three digital branches for
the lateral 1½ digits including the thumb.
The muscular branch curls upwards around the
distal border of the retinaculum and supplies the
thenar muscles.
Out of the three digital branches, two supply the
thumb and one the lateral side of the index finger.
The digital branch to the index finger also supplies
the first lumbrical (Fig. 9.37).
3 The medial division divides into two common digital
branches for the second and third interdigital clefts,
supplying the adjoining sides of the index, middle
and ring fingers.
The lateral common digital branch also supplies the
second lumbrical.
Branches
In the hand, the median nerve supplies:
a. Five muscles, namely the abductor pollicis brevis,
the flexor pollicis brevis, the opponens pollicis and
the first and second lumbrical muscles.
b. Palmar skin over the lateral 3½ digits with their nail
beds.
Competency achievement: The student should be able to:
AN 12.4 Explain anatomical basis of carpal tunnel syndrome.7
AN 12.8 Describe anatomical basis of claw hand.8
CLINICAL ANATOMY
• The median nerve controls coarse movements of
the hand, as it supplies most of the long muscles
of the front of the forearm. It is, therefore, called
the labourer’s nerve. It is also called ‘eye of the hand’
as it is sensory to most of the hand.
• When the median nerve is injured above the level
of the elbow, as might happen in supracondylar
fracture of the humerus, the following features are
seen.
a. The flexor pollicis longus and lateral half of
flexor digitorum profundus are paralysed. The
patient is unable to bend the terminal phalanx
of the thumb and index finger when the
proximal phalanx is held firmly by the clinician
(to eliminate the action of the short flexors)
(Fig. 9.38). Similarly, the terminal phalanx of the
middle finger can be tested.
b. The forearm is kept in a supine position due to
paralysis of the pronators.
--- Page 162 ---
FOREARM AND HAND
Upper Limb
Section 1
Fig. 9.39: Pointing index finger
c. The hand is adducted due to paralysis of the
flexor carpi radialis, and flexion at the wrist is
weak.
d. Flexion at the interphalangeal joints of the index
and middle fingers is lost so that the index and
the middle (to a lesser extent) fingers tend to
remain straight while making a fist. This is
called pointing index finger, occurs due to
paralysis of long flexors of the digit (Fig. 9.39).
e. Ape or monkey-like thumb deformity is present
due to paralysis of the thenar muscles (Fig. 9.40).
f. The area of sensory loss corresponds to its
distribution (Fig. 9.41) in the hand.
g. Vasomotor and trophic changes: The skin on
lateral 3½ digits is warm, dry and scaly. The
nails get cracked easily (Fig. 9.42).
• Carpal tunnel syndrome (CTS): Involvement of the
median nerve in carpal tunnel at wrist has become
a very common entity (Fig. 9.15).
Fig. 9.38: Testing for anterior interosseous nerve
Fig. 9.41: Sensory loss in median, ulnar and radial nerves
paralysis
Fig. 9.40: Ape-/monkey-like thumb deformity
Fig. 9.42: Vasomotor and trophic changes in right hand
--- Page 163 ---
UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
Fig. 9.45: Complete claw hand
a. This syndrome consists of motor, sensory,
vasomotor and trophic symptoms in the hand
caused by compression of the median nerve in
the carpal tunnel. Examination reveals wasting
of thenar eminence (ape-like hand), hypo-
aesthesia to light touch on the palmar aspect of
lateral 3½ digits. However, the skin over the
thenar eminence is not affected as the branch of
median nerve supplying it arises in the forearm.
b. Froment’s sign/book holding test: The patient
is unable to hold the book with thumbs and
other fingers.
c. Paper holding test: The patient is unable to hold
paper between thumb and fingers.
Both these tests are positive because of paralysis
of thenar muscles.
d. Motor changes: Ape-/monkey-like thumb
deformity (Fig. 9.40), loss of opposition of
thumb. Index and middle fingers lag behind
while making the fist due to paralysis of 1st and
2nd lumbrical muscles (Fig. 9.43).
e. Sensory changes: Loss of sensations on lateral 3½
digits including the nail beds and distal
phalanges on dorsum of hand (Fig. 9.41).
f. Vasomotor changes: The skin areas with sensory
loss is warmer due to arteriolar dilatation; it is
also drier due to absence of sweating due to
loss of sympathetic supply.
g. Trophic changes: Long-standing cases of
paralysis lead to dry and scaly skin. The nails
crack easily with atrophy of the pulp of fingers
(Fig. 9.42).
Fig. 9.43: Lagging behind of index and middle fingers in
making the fist due to paralysis of first and second lumbrical
muscles in median nerve paralysis
Fig. 9.44: Phalen’s test: Acutely flexed wrist causes pain in
carpal tunnel syndrome
h. It occurs both in males and females between
the age of 25 and 70. They complain of
intermittent attacks of pain in the distribution
of the median nerve on one or both sides. The
attacks frequently occur at night. Pain may be
referred proximally to the forearm and arm. It
is more common because of excessive working
on the computer. Phalen’s test (Fig. 9.44) is
attempted for CTS.
• Complete claw hand: If both median and ulnar
nerves are paralysed, the result is complete claw
hand (Fig. 9.45).
RADIAL NERVE
The part of the radial nerve seen in the hand is a
continuation of the superficial terminal branch. It
reaches the dorsum of the hand (after winding round
--- Page 164 ---
FOREARM AND HAND
Upper Limb
Section 1
Fig. 9.46: Sensory loss in injury to superficial branch of radial
nerve
the lateral anatomical snuffbox on side of the radius)
and divides into 4 dorsal digital branches which supply
the skin of the digits as follows (see Fig. 7.1).
: Lateral side of thumb
2nd : Medial side of thumb
3rd : Lateral side of index finger
: Contiguous sides of index and middle fingers
Note that skin over the dorsum of the distal
phalanges is supplied by the median nerve (not radial)
(Fig. 9.46). Sensory loss is less because of overlapping
of nerves.
Palmar Spaces
Pulp Space of the Fingers
The tips of the fingers and thumb contain subcutaneous
fat arranged in tight compartments formed by fibrous
septa which pass from the skin to the periosteum of
the terminal phalanx. Infection of this space is known
as whitlow. The rising tension in the space gives rise to
severe throbbing pain.
Infections in the pulp space (whitlow) can be drained
by a lateral incision which opens all compartments and
avoids damage to the tactile tissue in front of the finger.
If neglected, a whitlow may lead to necrosis of the
distal four-fifths of the terminal phalanx due to
occlusion of the vessels by the tension. The proximal
one-fifth (epiphysis) escapes because its artery does not
traverse the fibrous septa (Fig. 9.47).
Midpalmar and Thenar Spaces
Midpalmar and thenar spaces are shown in Table 9.7
and Fig. 9.48.
Dorsal Spaces
The dorsal subcutaneous space lies immediately deep to
the loose skin of the dorsum of the hand. The dorsal
subaponeurotic space lies between the metacarpal bones
and the extensor tendons which are united to one
another by a thin aponeurosis.
Forearm Space of Parona
Forearm space of Parona is a rectangular space situated
deep in the lower part of the forearm just above the
wrist. It lies in front of the pronator quadratus, and deep
to the long flexor tendons. Superiorly, the space extends
up to the oblique origin of the flexor digitorum
superficialis. Inferiorly, it extends up to the flexor
retinaculum, and communicates with the midpalmar
space. The proximal part of the flexor synovial sheaths
protrudes into the forearm space.
Competency achievement: The student should be able to:
AN 12.10 Explain infection of fascial spaces of palm.9
FASCIAL SPACES OF HAND
Having learnt the anatomy of the whole hand, the
clinically significant spaces of the hand need to be
understood and their boundaries to be identified from
the following text.
The arrangement of fasciae and the fascial septa in
the hand is such that many spaces are formed. These
spaces are of surgical importance because they may
become infected and distended with pus. The important
spaces are as follows.
A. Palmar spaces
 1. Pulp space of the fingers
 2. Midpalmar space
 3. Thenar space
B. Dorsal spaces
 1. Dorsal subcutaneous space
 2. Dorsal subaponeurotic space
C. The forearm space of Parona.
Fig. 9.47: The digital pulp space
--- Page 165 ---
UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
Fig. 9.48: Thenar, midpalmar, dorsal subcutaneous and dorsal subaponeurotic spaces. I, II, III, IV — dorsal interossei and 1, 2, 3,
4 — palmar interossei
The forearm space may be infected through
infections in the related synovial sheaths, especially of
the ulnar bursa. Pus points at the margins of the distal
part of the forearm where it may be drained by giving
incision along the lateral margin of forearm.
SYNOVIAL SHEATHS
Many of the tendons entering the hand are surrounded
by synovial sheaths. The extent of these sheaths is of
surgical importance as they can be infected (Fig. 9.7).
Digital Synovial Sheaths
The synovial sheaths of the 2nd, 3rd and 4th digits
are independent and terminate proximally at the
levels of the heads of the metacarpals. The synovial
sheath of the little finger is continuous proximally
with the ulnar bursa, and that of the thumb with the
radial bursa. Therefore, infections of the little finger
and thumb are more dangerous because they can
spread into the palm and even up to 2.5 cm above
the wrist (Fig. 9.7).
Table 9.7: Midpalmar and thenar spaces (Figs 9.48 and 9.49)
Features
Midpalmar space
Thenar space
1. Shape
Triangular
Triangular
2. Situation
Under the inner half of the hollow of the palm
Under the outer half of the hollow of the palm
3. Extent:
Proximal
Distal margin of the flexor retinaculum
Distal margin of the flexor retinaculum
Distal
Distal palmar crease
Proximal transverse palmar crease
4. Communications:
Proximal
Forearm space of Parona
Forearm space of Parona
Distal
Fascial sheaths of the 3rd and 4th lumbricals
Fascial sheath of the first lumbrical
5. Boundaries:
Anterior
• Flexor tendons of 3rd, 4th and 5th digits
• Short muscles of thumb
• 2nd, 3rd and 4th lumbricals
• Flexor tendons of the index finger
• Palmar aponeurosis
• First lumbrical
• Palmar aponeurosis
Posterior
Fascia covering interossei and metacarpals
Transverse head of adductor pollicis (Fig. 9.49)
Lateral
Intermediate palmar septum
• Tendon of flexor pollicis longus with radial bursa
• Lateral palmar septum
Medial
Medial palmar septum
Intermediate palmar septum
6. Drainage
Incision in either the 3rd or 4th web space
Incision in the first web, posteriorly
--- Page 166 ---
FOREARM AND HAND
Upper Limb
Section 1
Fig. 9.49: Muscles forming floor of the thenar and midpalmar
spaces
Fig. 9.50: The surgical incisions of the hand
Ulnar Bursa
Infection of this bursa is usually secondary to the
infection of the little finger, and this in turn may spread
to the forearm space of the Parona. It results in an hour-
glass swelling (so called because there is one swelling in
the palm and another in the distal part of the forearm,
the two being joined by a constriction in the region of
the flexor retinaculum). It is also called compound
palmar ganglion.
Radial Bursa
Infection of the thumb may spread to the radial bursa.
CLINICAL ANATOMY
Surgical Incisions
The surgical incisions of the hand are shown in
Fig. 9.50.
BACK OF FOREARM AND HAND
This section deals mainly with the extensor retinaculum
of the wrist, muscles of the back of the forearm, the
deep terminal branch of the radial nerve, and the
posterior interosseous artery.
SURFACE LANDMARKS
1 The olecranon process of the ulna is the most
prominent bony point on the back of a flexed elbow
(Fig. 9.51). Normally, it forms a straight horizontal
line with the two epicondyles of the humerus when
the elbow is extended, and an equilateral triangle
when the elbow is flexed to a right angle (see Fig. 2.17).
The relative position of the three bony points is
disturbed when the elbow is dislocated.
2 The head of the radius can be palpated in a depression
on the posterolateral aspect of an extended elbow
just below the lateral epicondyle of the humerus. Its
rotation can be felt during pronation and supination
of the forearm.
3 The posterior border of the ulna is subcutaneous in its
entire length. It can be felt in a longitudinal groove
on the back of the forearm when the elbow is flexed
and the hand is supinated. The border ends distally
in the styloid process of the ulna. It separates the
flexors from the extensors of the forearm. Being
superficial, it allows the entire length of the ulna to
be examined for fractures.
4 The head of the ulna forms a surface elevation on the
posteromedial aspect of the wrist in a pronated
forearm.
5 The styloid processes of the radius and ulna are
important landmarks of the wrist. The styloid
process of the radius can be felt in the upper part of
the anatomical snuffbox. It projects down 1 cm lower
than the styloid process of the ulna. The latter
descends from the posteromedial aspect of the ulnar
head. The relative position of the two styloid
processes is disturbed in fractures at the wrist, and
is a clue to the proper realignment of fractured bones.
6 The dorsal tubercle of the radius (Lister’s tubercle) can
be palpated on the dorsal surface of the lower end of
the radius in line with the cleft between the index
and middle fingers. It is grooved on its medial side
by the tendon of the extensor pollicis longus.
7 The heads of the metacarpals form the knuckles.
DORSUM OF HAND
1 Skin: It is loose on the dorsum of hand. It can be
pinched off from the underlying structures.
2 Superficial fascia: The fascia contains dorsal venous
plexus, cutaneous nerves, and dorsal carpal arch.
--- Page 167 ---
UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
Fig. 9.52a: Anatomical snuffbox
a. Dorsal venous plexus: The digital veins from adja-
cent sides of index, middle, ring and little fingers
form 3 dorsal metacarpal veins (see Fig. 7.7). These
join with each other on dorsum of hand. The
lateral end of this arch is joined by one digital vein
from index finger and two digital veins from
thumb to form cephalic vein. It runs proximally
in the anatomical snuffbox, curves, round the lateral
border of wrist to come to front of forearm. In a
similar manner, the medial end of the arch joins
with one digital vein only from medial side of little
finger to form basilic vein. It also curves around
the medial side of wrist to reach front of forearm.
These metacarpal veins may unite in different
ways to form a dorsal venous plexus.
b. Cutaneous nerves: These are superficial branch of
radial nerve and dorsal branch of ulnar nerve. The
nail beds and skin of distal phalanges of 3½ lateral
nails is supplied by median nerve and 1½ medial
nails by ulnar nerve. The superficial branch of
radial nerve supplies lateral half of dorsum of
hand with two digital branches to thumb and one
to lateral side of index and another common
digital branch to adjacent sides of index and
middle fingers (see Fig. 7.1b).
Dorsal branch of ulnar supplies medial half of
dorsum of hand with proper digital branches to
medial side of little finger; two common digital
branches for adjacent sides of little and ring fingers
and adjacent sides of ring and middle fingers.
c. Dorsal carpal arch: It is formed by dorsal carpal
branches of radial and ulnar arteries and lies close
to the wrist joint. The arch gives three dorsal
metacarpal arteries which supply adjacent sides
of index, middle; ring and little fingers. One digital
artery goes to medial side of little finger. The arch
also gives branches to the dorsum of hand.
3 Spaces on dorsum of hand: There are two spaces on
the dorsum of hand:
a. Dorsal subcutaneous space, lying just subjacent to
skin. Skin of dorsum of hand is loose can be
pinched and lifted off.
b. Dorsal subtendinous space lies deep to the extensor
tendons, between the tendons and the metacarpal
bones (Fig. 9.48).
4 Deep fascia: The deep fascia is modified at the back
of hand to form extensor retinaculum.
Anatomical Snuffbox
The anatomical snuffbox (Fig. 9.52a) is a triangular
depression on the posterolateral side of the wrist. It is
seen best when the thumb is extended.
Boundaries
It is bounded anteriorly by tendons of the abductor
pollicis longus and extensor pollicis brevis, and
posteriorly by the tendon of the extensor pollicis longus.
It is limited above by the styloid process of the radius.
The floor of the snuffbox is formed by the scaphoid,
the trapezium and base of 1st metacarpal.
Fig. 9.51: Surface landmarks
--- Page 168 ---
FOREARM AND HAND
Upper Limb
Section 1
Contents
The radial artery is deep while the superficial branch
of radial nerve and cephalic vein are superficial.
Competency achievement: The student should be able to:
AN 12.14 Identify and describe compartments deep to extensor
retinaculum.10
Extensor Retinaculum
The deep fascia on the back of the wrist is thickened to
form the extensor retinaculum which holds the extensor
tendons in place. It is an oblique band, directed
downwards and medially. It is about 2 cm broad
vertically (Fig. 9.52b).
Attachments
Laterally: Lower part of the sharp anterior border of
the radius.
Medially:
i. Styloid process of the ulna
ii. Triquetral
iii. Pisiform
Compartments
The retinaculum sends down septa which are attached
to the longitudinal ridges on the posterior surface of
the lower end of radius. In this way, 6 osseofascial
compartments are formed on the back of the wrist
(see Fig. 2.21b). The structures passing through each
compartment, from lateral to the medial side, are listed
in Table 9.8 and Fig. 9.53.
Each compartment is lined by a synovial sheath,
which is reflected onto the contained tendons.
Fig. 9.52b: Muscles of the back of forearm
Fig. 9.52c: Dissection of back of forearm
--- Page 169 ---
UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
Figs 9.53a and b: (a) Attachments of extensor retinaculum; (b) transverse section passing just above the wrist showing structures
passing through I–VI compartments deep to the extensor retinaculum
DISSECTION
Make the incision in the centre of dorsum of hand.
Reflect the skin of dorsum of hand till the respective
borders. Reflect the skin of dorsum of middle finger on
each side. Look for nerves on the back of forearm and
hand. These are superficial branch of radial nerve and
dorsal branch of ulnar nerve.
The dorsal venous network is the most prominent
component of the superficial fascia of dorsum of hand.
(Identify the beginning of cephalic and basilic veins by
tying a tourniquet on the forearm and exercising the
closed fist on oneself.)
The deep fascia at the back of wrist is thickened to
form extensor retinaculum. Define its margins and
Table 9.8: Structures in various compartments under
extensor retinaculum
Compartment
Structure
• Abductor pollicis longus (Fig. 9.52c)
• Extensor pollicis brevis
• Extensor carpi radialis longus
• Extensor carpi radialis brevis
• Extensor pollicis longus
• Extensor digitorum (Fig. 9.52c)
• Extensor indicis
• Posterior interosseous nerve
• Anterior interosseous artery
• Extensor digiti minimi
• Extensor carpi ulnaris
attachments. Identify the structures traversing its six
compartments.
Clear the deep fascia over the back of forearm.
Define the attachment of triceps brachii muscle on the
olecranon process of ulna. Define the attachments of
the seven superficial muscles of the back of the forearm.
Separate the anterolateral muscles, i.e. brachioradialis,
extensor carpi radialis longus and brevis from the extensor
digitorum lying in the centre and extensor digiti minimi
and extensor carpi ulnaris situated on the medial aspect
of the wrist (Fig. 9.52b). Anconeus is situated on the
posterolateral aspect of the elbow joint. Dissect all these
muscles and trace their nerve supply (refer to BDC App).
Competency achievement: The student should be able to:
AN 12.11 Identify, describe and demonstrate important muscle
groups of dorsal forearm with attachments, nerve supply and
actions.11
MUSCLES OF BACK OF FOREARM
SUPERFICIAL MUSCLES
There are seven superficial muscles on the back of the
forearm:
1 Anconeus
2 Brachioradialis (Fig. 9.52b)
3 Extensor carpi radialis longus
4 Extensor carpi radialis brevis
5 Extensor digitorum (Fig. 9.52c).
--- Page 170 ---
FOREARM AND HAND
Upper Limb
Section 1
Table 9.9: Attachments of superficial muscles of back of forearm
Muscle
Origin
Insertion
1. Anconeus (see Fig. 2.14b)
Lateral epicondyle of humerus
Lateral surface of olecranon process of ulna
2. Brachioradialis (see
Upper two-thirds of lateral supracondylar
Base of styloid process of radius (see Fig. 2.22)
Fig. 2.14a)
ridge of humerus
3. Extensor carpi radialis
Lower one-third of lateral supracondylar
Posterior surface of base of second metacarpal
longus (see Fig. 2.14a)
ridge of humerus
bone
4. Extensor carpi radialis brevis Lateral epicondyle of humerus
Posterior surface of base of third metacarpal
5. Extensor digitorum
Lateral epicondyle of humerus
Bases of middle phalanges of the 2nd–5th digits
6. Extensor digiti minimi
Lateral epicondyle of humerus
Extensor expansion of little finger
7. Extensor carpi ulnaris
Lateral epicondyle of humerus
Base of fifth metacarpal bone (Fig. 9.52b)
DEEP MUSCLES
Features
These are as follows:
1 Supinator
2 Abductor pollicis longus
3 Extensor pollicis brevis
4 Extensor pollicis longus (see Fig. 2.23)
5 Extensor indicis
In contrast to the superficial muscles, none of the
deep muscles crosses the elbow joint. These have been
tabulated in Tables 9.11 and 9.12.
Competency achievement: The student should be able to:
AN 12.15 Identify and describe extensor expansion formation.12
Dorsal Digital Expansion/Extensor Expansion
The dorsal digital expansion (extensor expansion) is a
small triangular aponeurosis (related to each tendon
of the extensor digitorum) covering the dorsum of the
proximal phalanx. Its base, which is proximal, covers
the metacarpophalangeal (MP) joint. The main tendon
of the extensor digitorum occupies the central part of
the extension, and is separated from the MP joint by a
bursa.
The posterolateral corners of the extensor expansion
are joined by tendons of the interossei and of lumbrical
muscles. The corners are attached to the deep transverse
6 Extensor digiti minimi (Fig. 9.52b)
7 Extensor carpi ulnaris.
All the seven muscles cross the elbow joint. Most of
them take origin (entirely or in part) from the tip of the
lateral epicondyle of the humerus.
These muscles with their nerve supply and actions
are described in Tables 9.9 and 9.10.
Additional Points
1 The extensor digitorum and extensor indicis pass
through the same compartment of the extensor
retinaculum, and have a common synovial sheath.
2 The four tendons of the extensor digitorum emerge
from undercover of the extensor retinaculum and fan
out over the dorsum of the hand. The tendon to the
index finger is joined on its medial side by the tendon
of the extensor indicis, and the tendon to the little
finger is joined on its medial side by the two tendons
of the extensor digiti minimi.
3 On the dorsum of the hand, adjacent tendons are
variably connected together by three intertendinous
connections directed obliquely downwards and
laterally. The medial connection is strong; the lateral
connection is weakest and may be absent.
The four tendons and three intertendinous
connections are embedded in deep fascia, and
together form the roof of the subtendinous
(subaponeurotic) space on the dorsum of the hand.
Table 9.10: Nerve supply and actions of superficial muscles of back of forearm
Muscle
Nerve supply
Actions
1. Anconeus
Radial nerve
Extends elbow joint
2. Brachioradialis
Radial nerve
Flexes forearm at elbow joint; rotates forearm to the
midprone position from supine or prone positions
3. Extensor carpi radialis longus
Radial nerve
Extends and abducts hand at wrist joint
4. Extensor carpi radialis brevis
Deep branch of radial nerve
Extends and abducts hand at wrist joint
5. Extensor digitorum
Deep branch of radial nerve
Extends fingers of hand
6. Extensor digiti minimi
Deep branch of radial nerve
Extends metacarpophalangeal joint of little finger
7. Extensor carpi ulnaris
Deep branch of radial nerve
Extends and adducts hand at wrist joint
--- Page 171 ---
UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
Table 9.12: Nerve supply and actions of deep muscles of back of forearm
Muscle
Nerve supply
Actions
1. Supinator (Fig. 9.9)
Deep branch of radial nerve
Supination of forearm when elbow is extended
2. Abductor pollicis longus
Deep branch of radial nerve
Abducts and extends thumb
3. Extensor pollicis brevis
Deep branch of radial nerve
Extends metacarpophalangeal joint of thumb
4. Extensor pollicis longus
Deep branch of radial nerve
Extends distal phalanx of thumb
5. Extensor indicis
Deep branch of radial nerve
Extends metacarpophalangeal joint of index finger
Table 9.11: Attachments of deep muscles of back of forearm
Muscle
Origin
Insertion
1. Supinator (see Fig. 2.22)
Lateral epicondyle of humerus, annular
Neck and whole shaft of upper one-
ligament of superior radioulnar joint,
third of radius (see Fig. 2.23)
supinator crest of ulna and depression
anterior to it
2. Abductor pollicis longus (see Fig. 2.23) Posterior surface of shafts of radius and ulna Base of first metacarpal bone
3. Extensor pollicis brevis
Posterior surface of shaft of radius
Base of proximal phalanx of thumb
4. Extensor pollicis longus
Posterior surface of shaft of ulna
Base of distal phalanx of thumb
5. Extensor indicis
Posterior surface of shaft of ulna
Extensor expansion of index finger
metacarpal ligament. The points of attachment of the
interossei (proximal) and lumbrical (distal) are often
called ‘wing tendons’ (Fig. 9.54).
Near the proximal interphalangeal joint, the
extensor tendon divides into a central slip and two
collateral slips. The central slip is joined by some fibres
from the margins of the expansion, crosses the
proximal interphalangeal joint, and is inserted on the
dorsum of the base of the middle phalanx. The two
collateral slips are joined by the remaining thick
margin of the extensor expansion. They then join each
other and are inserted on the dorsum of the base of
the distal phalanx.
At the metacarpophalangeal and interphalangeal
joints, the extensor expansion forms the dorsal part of
the fibrous capsule of the joints.
The retinacular ligaments (link ligaments) extend from
the side of the proximal phalanx, and form its fibrous
flexor sheath, to the margins of the extensor expansion
to reach the base of the distal phalanx (Fig. 9.54).
Fig. 9.54: The dorsal digital expansion of right index, middle, ring and little fingers. Note the insertions of the lumbricals and
interossei into it
--- Page 172 ---
FOREARM AND HAND
Upper Limb
Section 1
The muscles inserted into the dorsal digital expansions of:
• Index finger: First dorsal interosseous, second palmar
interosseous, first lumbrical, extensor digitorum slip,
and extensor indicis (Fig. 9.54).
• Middle finger: Second and third dorsal interossei,
second lumbrical, extensor digitorum slip.
• Ring finger: Fourth dorsal interosseous, third palmar
interosseous, third lumbrical and extensor digitorum
slip.
• Little finger: Fourth palmar interosseous, fourth
lumbrical, extensor digitorum slip and extensor digiti
minimi.
DISSECTION
Separate extensor carpi radials brevis from extensor
digitorum and identify deeply placed supinator
muscle.
Just distal to supinator is abductor pollicis longus.
Other three muscles: Extensor pollicis longus, extensor
pollicis brevis and extensor indicis are present distal to
abductor pollicis longus. Identify them all (refer to BDC
App).
Competency achievement: The student should be able to:
AN 12.12 Identify and describe origin, course, relations, branches
(or tributaries), termination of important nerves and vessels of back
of forearm.13
POSTERIOR INTEROSSEOUS NERVE
Features
It is the chief nerve of the back of the forearm. It is a branch
of the radial nerve given off in the cubital fossa, just
below the level of the lateral epicondyle of the humerus.
Course
It begins in cubital fossa. Passes through supinator
muscle to reach back of forearm, where it descends
downwards. It ends in a pseudoganglion in the 4th
compartment of extensor retinaculum.
Relations
1 Posterior interosseous nerve leaves the cubital fossa
and enters the back of the forearm by passing
between the two planes of fibres of the supinator.
Within the muscle it winds backwards around the
lateral side of the radius (Fig. 9.55).
2 It emerges from the supinator on the back of the
forearm. Here it lies between the superficial and deep
muscles. At the lower border of the extensor pollicis
brevis, it passes deep to the extensor pollicis longus.
It then runs on the posterior surface of the
interosseous membrane up to the wrist where it
enlarges into a pseudoganglion and ends by supplying
the wrist and intercarpal joints.
Branches
Posterior interosseous nerve gives muscular, articular
and sensory branches (Figs 9.56a and b).
A.Muscular branches
a. Before piercing the supinator, branches are given
to the extensor carpi radialis brevis and to the
supinator.
b. While passing through the supinator, another
branch is given to the supinator.
c. After emerging from the supinator, the nerve
gives three short branches to:
i. The extensor digitorum (Fig. 9.56b).
ii. The extensor digiti minimi.
iii. The extensor carpi ulnaris.
It also gives two long branches:
i. A lateral branch supplies the abductor pollicis
longus and the extensor pollicis brevis.
ii. A medial branch supplies the extensor pollicis
longus and the extensor indicis.
B. Articular branches: Articular branches are given to:
i. The wrist joint.
ii. The distal radioulnar joint.
iii. Intercarpal and intermetacarpal joints.
C. Sensory branches: Sensory branches are given to the
interosseous membrane, the radius and the ulna.
Fig. 9.55: Course and relations of the posterior interosseous
nerve and the interosseous arteries
--- Page 173 ---
UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
DISSECTION
Deep terminal branch of radial nerve/posterior
interosseous nerve and posterior interosseous artery:
Identify the posterior interosseous nerve at the distal
border of exposed supinator muscle. Trace its branches
to the various muscles.
Look for the radial nerve in the lower lateral part of
front of arm between the brachioradialis, extensor carpi
radialis longus laterally and brachialis muscle medially.
Trace the two divisions of this nerve in the lateral part
of the cubital fossa. The deep branch (posterior intero-
sseous nerve) traverses between the two planes of
supinator muscle and reaches the back of the forearm
where it is already identified.
The nerve runs amongst the muscles of the back of
the forearm, and ends at the level of the wrist in a
pseudoganglion (Fig. 9.55).
This nerve is accompanied by posterior interosseous
artery distal to the supinator muscle. This artery is
supplemented by anterior interosseous artery in lower
one-fourth of the forearm.
POSTERIOR INTEROSSEOUS ARTERY
Course
Posterior interosseous artery is the smaller terminal
branch of the common interosseous, given off in the
cubital fossa. It enters the back of the forearm and lies
in between the muscles there.
It terminates by anastomosing with the anterior
interosseous artery.
Relations
1 It is the smaller terminal branch of the common
interosseous artery in the cubital fossa.
2 It enters the back of the forearm by passing between
the oblique cord and the upper margin of the
interosseous membrane (Fig. 9.55).
3 It appears on the back of the forearm in the interval
between the supinator and the abductor pollicis
longus and thereafter accompanies the posterior
interosseous nerve. At the lower border of the
extensor indicis, the artery becomes markedly
reduced and ends by anastomosing with the anterior
interosseous artery which reaches the posterior
compartment by piercing the interosseous membrane
at the upper border of the pronator quadratus. Thus
Figs 9.56a and b: Branches of the posterior interosseous nerve
--- Page 174 ---
FOREARM AND HAND
Upper Limb
Section 1
in its lower one-fourth, the back of the forearm is
supplied by the anterior interosseous artery.
4 The posterior interosseous artery gives off an
interosseous recurrent branch which runs upwards
and takes part in the anastomosis on the back of the
lateral epicondyle of the humerus (see Fig. 8.10).
ARCHES OF HAND
Hand like foot also has arches. The daily tasks are
helped by these arches. The arches are:
i. Proximal transverse arch formed by the two rows
of carpal bones.
ii. Distal transverse arch formed by distal ends of
metacarpal bones (Fig. 9.57).
2nd and 3rd carpometacarpal joints are immobile
and have zero degree of freedom. 4th has some
movement, 5th carpometacarpal joint is a saddle
joint with good amount of movement, i.e. flexion/
extension; abduction/adduction and opposition.
iii. Longitudinal arch runs along the length of the hand.
2nd and 3rd metacarpal bones form the keystone of
the arches. As these are the fixed bones. 1st, 4th and
5th metacarpal bones fold on the sides of 2nd and
3rd metacarpal bones. These arches form concave
base for better prehensile activities. Arches are
maintained by palmar aponeurosis, palmar
metacarpal ligaments, muscles of thenar and
hypothenar eminences, long flexor tendons and
dorsal interossei.
Palmar arches permit palm and digits to hold the
objects firmly. Opponens digit minimi can flex and
rotate 5th metacarpal along its long axis. Stability
of 2nd and 3rd carpometacarpal joints is a functional
adaptation to improve actions of flexor carpi
radialis, extensor carpi radialis longus and extensor
carpi radialis brevis.
Mnemonics
Anterior forearm muscles: Superficial group
“Pretti Found Pamela for Fight”
Pronator teres
Flexor carpi radialis
Palmaris longus
Flexor carpi ulnaris
Flexor digitorum superficialis
Interossei muscles: Actions of dorsal vs. palmar
in hand “PAd and DAb”
Fig. 9.57: Arches of the hand
--- Page 175 ---
UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
The Palmar Adduct and the Dorsal Abduct.
– Use your hand to dab with a pad.
Median nerve: Hand muscles innervated “The
LOAF muscles”
Lumbricals 1 and 2
Opponens pollicis
Abductor pollicis brevis
Flexor pollicis brevis
Radial nerve: Muscles supplied (simplified)
“BEST muscles”
Brachioradialis
Extensors of wrist metacarpophalangeal and
‘interphalangeal joints’
Supinator, anconeus
Triceps brachii
Lumbricals action
Lumbricals action is to hold a pea, that is to flex the
metacarpophalangeal joints and extend the
interphalangeal joints. When one looks at hand in
this position, can see this makes an “L” shape, since
L is for Lumbrical.
Brachioradialis: Function, innervation, one
relation, on attachment
BrachioRadials:
Function: It’s the Beer Raising muscle, flexes elbow,
strongest when wrist is oriented like holding a beer
mug.
Innvervation: Breaks Rule: It’s a flexor muscle. But
Radial (Radial nerve usually is for extensors) supplies
it BEST rule: B was for brachioradials).
Important relation: Behind it is the Radial nerve in
the cubital fossa.
Attachment: Attaches to Bottom of Radius.
Elbow: Which side has common flexor origin
FM (as in FM Radio)
Flexor Medial, so Common Flexor Origin is on the
medial side.
FACTS TO REMEMBER
• Median nerve exits the cubital fossa by passing
between two heads of pronator teres while ulnar
artery passes deep to both the heads of pronator teres.
• Anterior interosseous branch of median nerve
supplies 2½ muscles of front of the forearm, i.e.
flexor pollicis longus, pronator quadratus and
lateral half of flexor digitorum profundus.
• Flexor retinaculum has a superficial slip medially and
a deep slip laterally. Deep to superficial slip course
ulnar nerve and vessels and superficial to the deep
slip passes the tendon of flexor carpi radialis.
• Thenar eminence does not include the adductor
pollicis muscle. It comprises abductor pollicis
brevis, flexor pollicis brevis and opponens pollicis.
• Median nerve supplies 5 muscles in the palm, three
muscles of thenar eminence and 1st and 2nd
lumbricals. It is called ‘labourer’s nerve’. Median
nerve is also the ‘Eye of the hand’.
• Ulnar nerve is called ‘Musician’s nerve’. It supplies
15 intrinsic muscles of the hand.
• There are 12 muscles on the back of forearm, two
are smaller (supinator and anconeus) lying in upper
one-fourth of the forearm, five are inserted close to
the wrist (BR, APL, ECRL, ECRB and ECU); five get
inserted into the phalanges (EPB, EPL, EI, ED and
EDM). All are supplied by radial or posterior
interosseous nerve. Injury to the nerve causes
‘wrist drop’.
• Lateral 3½ nail beds are supplied by median nerve
and medial 1½ nail beds by ulnar nerve.
CLINICOANATOMICAL PROBLEMS
Case 1
A young man practising tennis complained of severe
pain over lateral part of his right elbow. The pain
was pin-pointed over his lateral epicondyle.
• Why does pain occur over lateral epicondyle
during tennis games?
• Which other games can cause similar pain?
Ans: The pain is due to lateral epicondylitis, also called
tennis elbow. This is due to repeated microtrauma to
the common extensor origin of extensor muscles of
the forearm. It can also occur in swimming, gymnastics,
basketball, table tennis, i.e. any sport which involves
strenuous use of the extensors of the forearm. It may
be a degenerative condition.
Case 2
A 55-year-old woman complained of abnormal
sensations in her right thumb, index, middle and part
of ring fingers. Her pain increased during night.
There was weakness of her thumb movements.
• Which nerve was affected and where? Name the
syndrome.
Ans: Median nerve is affected while it travels deep to
the flexor retinaculum. The syndrome is ‘carpal tunnel
syndrome’. There are abnormal sensation in lateral 3½
digits, but there is no loss of sensation over lateral two-
thirds of palm. The nerve supply of this area is from
--- Page 176 ---
FOREARM AND HAND
Upper Limb
Section 1
palmar cutaneous branch of median nerve given in the
forearm and then it passes superficial to the flexor
retinaculum.
FURTHER READING
• Gupta A, Kay SPJ, Scheker LR. The Growing Hand. London:
Harcourt, 2000.
A source that includes articles on embryology growth and
congenital anomalies of the hand.
• Kakar S, Raheja S, Dinesh K. Bilateral accessory extensor
digitorum muscle in hand. A case report. JIMSA 2004;17(4):
235–36.
Presents the Oberg, Manske and Tonkin (OMT) classification
of upper limb anomalies and the challenges of incorporating
the molecular mechanisms of limb anomalies into current
systems.
• Singh S, Mahajan R, Raheja S, Rani N, Tuli A. Anatomical
diversity in flexor pollicis longus muscle. International
Medical Journal 2016;23(1):84–85.
• Tonkin MA, Tolerton SK, Quick TJ, et al. Classification of
congenital anomalies of the hand in upper limb: develop-
ment and assessment of a new system. J Hand Surg Am 2013;
38:1845–53.
1. Describe flexor digitorum profundus muscle under
following headings: Origin, insertion, nerve supply,
actions and special features.
2. Discuss the formation, course and branches of
superficial and deep palmar arches.
3. Write short notes on:
a. Flexor retinaculum of wrist
b. Layers of palm with their components
c. Midpalmar and thenar spaces
d. Extensor retinaculum of wrist and structures
passing in various compartments under the
retinaculum
e. Carpal tunnel syndrome
f. Wrist drop
g. Complete claw hand
1. Which of the following nerves leads to wrist drop?
a. Ulnar
b. Radial
c. Median
d. Musculocutaneous
2. Which nerve supplies adductor pollicis?
a. Median
b. Radial
c. Superficial branch of ulnar
d. Deep branch of ulnar
3. Which of the following is the action of dorsal
interosseous?
a. Abduction of fingers
b. Flexion of thumb
c. Adduction of fingers
d. Extension of metacarpophalangeal joints
4. Which of the following muscles is not supplied by
median nerve?
a. Abductor pollicis brevis
b. Flexor pollicis brevis
c. Opponens pollicis
d. Adductor pollicis
5. Which of the following nerves is involved in carpal
tunnel syndrome?
a. Ulnar
b. Median
c. Radial
d. Musculocutaneous
6. Which of the following structures does not pass
through the carpal tunnel?
a. Palmar cutaneous branch of median nerve
b. Median nerve
c. Tendons of flexor digitorum profundus
d. Tendon of flexor pollicis longus
7. Superficial cut only on the flexor retinaculum of
wrist would damage all structures, except:
a. Median nerve
b. Palmar cutaneous branch of median nerve
c. Palmar cutaneous branch of ulnar nerve
d. Ulnar nerve
1–13 From Medical Council of India, Competency based Undergraduate Curriculum for the Indian Medical Graduate, 2018;1:44–80.
--- Page 177 ---
UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
• Name the superficial muscles of front of forearm.
Name their nerve supply.
• How many deep muscles are there in front of
forearm? Which nerve innervates them?
• Where is the origin of lumbrical muscles? How many
are unipennate and how many are bipennate
muscles? How are the lumbricals innervated?
• Name the branches of radial artery in forearm, wrist
and palm.
• Name the branches of ulnar artery in forearm and
palm.
• What are the branches of common interosseous
artery?
• Which is the most important nerve of the front of
forearm?
• Which nerve supplies maximum muscles in the
palm? Name these muscles.
• Why does ‘carpal tunnel syndrome’ occur and what
are its symptoms?
• What are the attachments of flexor retinaculum?
Name structures passing superficial to the
retinaculum.
• Show the actions of palmar interossei and dorsal
interossei muscles.
• Name the boundaries and contents of ‘anatomical
snuffbox’.
• Which is the common site of injury to ulnar nerve?
• What is ape-/monkey- like deformity of thumb?
• Name the attachments of extensor retinaculum of
wrist.
• How many compartments are there under extensor
retinaculum of wrist? Enumerate their contents?
• Name the muscles supplied by posterior
interosseous/deep branch of radial nerve.
8. All the following structures are present in the carpal
tunnel, except:
a. Tendon of palmaris longus
b. Tendon of flexor pollicis longus
c. Tendons of flexor digitorum profundus
d. Median nerve
9. Compression of median nerve within carpal tunnel
causes inability to:
a. Flex the interphalangeal joint of thumb
b. Extend the interphalangeal joint of thumb
c. Adduct the thumb
d. Abduct the thumb
10. de Quervain’s disease affects:
a. Tendons of abductor pollicis longus and
abductor pollicis brevis
b. Tendons of abductor pollicis longus and extensor
pollicis brevis
c. Tendons of extensor carpi radialis longus and
extensor carpi radialis brevis
d. Tendons of flexor pollicis longus and flexor
pollicis brevis
1. b
2. d
3. a
4. d
5. b
6. a
7. a
8. a
9. d
10. b
--- Page 178 ---
INTRODUCTION
Joints are sites where two or more bones or cartilages
articulate. Free movements occur at the synovial joints.
Shoulder joint is the most freely mobile joint. Shoulder
joint gets excessive mobility at the cost of its own
stability, since both are not feasible to the same degree.
The carrying angle in relation to elbow joint is to
facilitate carrying objects like buckets without hitting
the pelvis.
Supination and pronation are basic movements for
the survival of human being. During pronation, the
food is picked and by supination it is put at the right
place—the mouth. While ‘giving’, one pronates, while
‘getting’ one supinates.
The first carpometacarpal joint allows movements
of opposition of thumb with the fingers for picking up
or holding things. Thumb is the most important digit.
Remember Guru Dronacharya asked Eklavya to give
his right thumb as Guru-Dakshina, so that he is not able
to outsmart Arjuna in archery.
SHOULDER GIRDLE
The shoulder girdle connects the upper limb to the axial
skeleton. It consists of the clavicle and the scapula.
Anteriorly, the clavicle reaches the sternum and
articulates with it at the sternoclavicular joint. The
clavicle and the scapula are united to each other at the
acromioclavicular joint. The scapula is not connected
to the axial skeleton directly, but is attached to it
through muscles. The clavicle and the scapula have
been studied in Chapter 2. The joints of the shoulder
girdle are described below.
Competency achievement: The student should be able to:
AN 13.4 Describe sternoclavicular joint, acromioclavicular joint.1
Joints of Upper Limb
Pronation is giving and supination is getting. There is no less joy in giving than in getting
If I have seen farther, it is by standing on the shoulder of giants 
—Sir Issac Newton
STERNOCLAVICULAR JOINT
Features
The sternoclavicular joint is a synovial joint. It is a
compound joint as there are three elements taking part
in it; namely the medial end of the clavicle, the
clavicular notch of the manubrium sterni, and the upper
surface of the first costal cartilage. It is a complex joint
as its cavity is subdivided into two compartments—
superomedial and inferolateral by an intra-articular disc
(Fig. 10.1).
The articular surface of the clavicle is covered with
fibrocartilage (as the clavicle is a membrane bone). The
surface is convex from above downwards and slightly
concave from front to back. The sternal surface is
smaller than the clavicular surface. It has a reciprocal
convexity and concavity. Because of the concavoconvex
shape of the articular surfaces, the joint can be classified
as a saddle joint.
The capsular ligament is attached laterally to the
margins of the clavicular articular surface; and medially
to the margins of the articular areas on the sternum
and on the first costal cartilage. It is strong anteriorly
and posteriorly where it constitutes the anterior and
posterior sternoclavicular ligaments.
However, the main bond of union at this joint is the
articular disc. The disc is placed laterally to the clavicle
on a rough area above and posterior to the articular
area for the sternum. Inferiorly, the disc is placed to
the sternum and to the first costal cartilage at their
junction. Anteriorly and posteriorly, the disc fuses with
the capsule.
There are two other ligaments associated with this
joint. The interclavicular ligament passes between the
sternal ends of the right and left clavicles, some of its
fibres being attached to the upper border of the
manubrium sterni (Fig. 10.1).
--- Page 179 ---
UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
The costoclavicular ligament is attached above to the
rough area on the inferior aspect of the medial end of
the clavicle. Inferiorly, it is attached to the first costal
cartilage and to the first rib. It consists of anterior and
posterior laminae.
Blood supply: Internal thoracic and suprascapular
arteries.
Nerve supply: Medial supraclavicular nerve.
Movements: Movements of the sternoclavicular joint
can be best understood by visualizing the movement
at the lateral end of clavicle. These movements are
elevation/depression, protraction/retraction and
anterior and posterior rotation of the clavicle. The
anterior and posterior rotation of clavicle is utilized in
overhead movements of the shoulder girdle.
DISSECTION
Remove the subclavius muscle from first rib at its
attachment with its costal cartilage. Identify the costo-
clavicular ligament.
Define the sternoclavicular joint and clean the anterior
and superior surfaces of the capsule of this joint. Cut
carefully through the joint to expose the intra-articular
disc positioned between the clavicle and the sternum.
The fibrocartilaginous disc divides the joint cavity into a
superomedial and an inferolateral compartments.
ACROMIOCLAVICULAR JOINT
Features
The acromioclavicular joint is a plane synovial joint. It
is formed by articulation of small facets present:
i. At the lateral end of the clavicle.
ii. On the medial margin of the acromion process of
the scapula.
The facets are covered with fibrocartilage. The cavity
of the joint is subdivided by an articular disc which
may have perforation in it (Fig. 10.1).
The bones are held together by a fibrous capsule and
by the articular disc. However, the main bond of union
between the scapula and the clavicle is the
coracoclavicular ligament described below (Fig. 10.1).
Blood supply: Suprascapular and thoracoacromial
arteries.
Nerve supply: Lateral supraclavicular nerve.
Movements: See movements of shoulder girdle.
Coracoclavicular Ligament
The ligament consists of two parts—conoid and
trapezoid. The trapezoid part is attached, below to the
upper surface of the coracoid process; and above to the
trapezoid line on the inferior surface of the lateral part
of the clavicle. The conoid part is attached, below to
the root of the coracoid process just lateral to the
scapular notch. It is attached above to the inferior
surface of the clavicle on the conoid tubercle.
Movements of the Shoulder Girdle
Movements at the two joints of the girdle are always
associated with the movements of the scapula
(Figs 10.2a to f). The movements of the scapula may or
may not be associated with the movements of the
shoulder joint. The various movements of shoulder
girdle are described below.
a. Elevation of the scapula (as in shrugging the
shoulders). The movement is brought about by the
upper fibres of the trapezius and by the levator
scapulae.
It is associated with the elevation of the lateral end,
and depression of the medial end of the clavicle. The
clavicle moves around an anteroposterior axis
formed by the costoclavicular ligament (Fig. 10.2a).
Fig. 10.1: The sternoclavicular and acromioclavicular joints
--- Page 180 ---
JOINTS OF UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
b. Depression of the scapula (drooping of the shoulder).
It is brought about by gravity, and actively by the
lower fibres of the serratus anterior and by the
pectoralis minor.
It is associated with the depression of the lateral
end, and elevation of the medial end of the clavicle
(Fig. 10.2b). Movements (a) and (b) occur in
inferolateral compartment.
c. Protraction of the scapula (as in pushing and punching
movements). It is brought about by the serratus
anterior and by the pectoralis minor (Fig. 10.2c).
It is associated with forward movements of the
lateral end and backward movement of the medial
end of the clavicle (Fig. 10.2c).
d. Retraction of the scapula (squaring the shoulders) is
brought about by the rhomboids and by the middle
fibres of the trapezius.
It is associated with backward movement of the
lateral end and forward movement of the medial end
of the clavicle (Fig. 10.2d).
Movements (c) and (d) occur in superomedial
compartment.
e. Lateral or forward rotation of the scapula around the
chest wall takes place during overhead abduction of
the arm. The scapula rotates around the coraco-
clavicular ligaments. The movement is brought about
by the upper and lower fibres of the trapezius and
the lower fibres of the serratus anterior. This
movement is associated with rotation of the clavicle
around its long axis (Fig. 10.2e).
f. Medial or backward rotation of the scapula occurs
under the influence of gravity, although it can be
brought about actively by the levator scapulae and
the rhomboids (Fig. 10.2f).
Movements (e) and (f) occur in inferolateral
compartment.
Ligaments of the Scapula
The coracoacromial ligament (see Fig. 6.7): It is a triangular
ligament, the apex of which is attached to the tip of the
acromion process, and the base to the lateral border of
the coracoid process.
The acromion process, the coracoacromial ligament
and the coracoid process, together form the coraco-
acromial arch, which is known as the secondary socket
for the head of the humerus. It adds to the stability of
the joint and protects the head of the humerus.
Figs 10.2a to f: Movements of the right shoulder girdle: (a) Elevation, (b) depression, (c) protraction, (d) retraction, (e) lateral
rotation of inferior angle, and (f) medial rotation of inferior angle
--- Page 181 ---
UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
The suprascapular ligament: It converts the scapular
notch into a foramen. The suprascapular nerve passes
below the ligament, and the suprascapular artery and
vein above the ligament (Fig. 10.3).
The spinoglenoid ligament: It is a weak band which
bridges the spinoglenoid notch. The suprascapular
nerve and vessels pass beneath the arch to enter the
infraspinous fossa (Fig. 10.3).
DISSECTION
Remove the muscles attached to the lateral end of
clavicle and acromial process of scapula. Define the
articular capsule surrounding the joint. Cut through the
capsule to identify the intra-articular disc. Look for the
strong coracoclavicular ligament.
Competency achievement: The student should be able to:
AN 10.12 Describe and demonstrate shoulder joint for—type,
articular surfaces, capsule, synovial membrane, ligaments, relations,
movements, muscles involved, blood supply, nerve supply and
applied anatomy.2
SHOULDER JOINT
Type
The shoulder joint is a synovial joint of ball and socket
variety.
The articular surface, ligaments, and bursae related
to this important joint are explained below.
Articular Surface
The joint is formed by articulation of the glenoid cavity
of scapula and the head of the humerus. Therefore, it is
also known as the glenohumeral articulation.
Structurally, it is a weak joint because the glenoid
cavity is too small and shallow to hold the head of the
humerus in place (the head is four times the size of the
glenoid cavity). However, this arrangement permits
great mobility. Stability of the joint is maintained by
the following factors.
1 The coracoacromial arch or secondary socket for
the head of the humerus (see Fig. 6.8).
2 The musculotendinous cuff of the shoulder
(see Fig. 6.7).
3 The glenoidal labrum (Latin lip) helps in
deepening the glenoid fossa. Stability is also
provided by the muscles attaching the humerus
to the pectoral girdle, the long head of the biceps
brachii, and the long head of the triceps brachii.
Atmospheric pressure also stabilises the joint.
Ligaments
1 The capsular ligament: It is very loose and permits free
movements. It is least supported inferiorly where
dislocations are common. Such a dislocation may
damage the closely related axillary nerve (see Fig. 6.8).
• Medially, the capsule is attached to the scapula
beyond the supraglenoid tubercle and the margins
of the labrum.
• Laterally, it is attached to the anatomical neck of
the humerus with the following exceptions.
Inferiorly, the attachment extends down to the
surgical neck (see Figs 2.14a and b).
Superiorly, it is deficient for passage of the
tendon of the long head of the biceps brachii
(Fig. 10.4a).
• Anteriorly, the capsule is reinforced by supple-
mental bands called the superior, middle and
inferior glenohumeral ligaments (Fig. 10.4b).
The area between the superior and middle gleno-
humeral ligament is a point of weakness in the
capsule (foramen of Weitbrecht) which is a common
site of anterior dislocation of humeral head.
The capsule is lined with synovial membrane.
An extension of this membrane forms a tubular
sheath for the tendon of the long head of the biceps
brachii.
2 The coracohumeral ligament: It extends from the root
of the coracoid process to the neck of the humerus
opposite the greater tubercle. It gives strength to the
capsule.
3 Transverse humeral ligament: It bridges the upper part
of the bicipital groove of the humerus (between the
greater and lesser tubercles). The tendon of the long
head of the biceps brachii passes deep to the ligament.
4 The glenoidal labrum: It is a fibrocartilaginous rim
which covers the margins of the glenoid cavity, thus
increasing the depth of the cavity.
Fig. 10.3: The suprascapular and spinoglenoid ligaments
--- Page 182 ---
JOINTS OF UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
Figs 10.4a and b: The shoulder joint
Bursae Related to the Joint
1 The subacromial (subdeltoid) bursa (see Figs 6.7 and 6.8).
2 The subscapularis bursa—communicates with the
joint cavity.
3 The infraspinatus bursa—may communicate with the
joint cavity.
The subacromial and the subdeltoid bursae are
commonly continuous with each other but may be
separate. Collectively they are called the subacromial
bursa, which separates the acromion process and the
coracoacromial ligaments from the supraspinatus
tendon and permits smooth motion. Any failure of this
mechanism can lead to inflammatory conditions of the
supraspinatus tendon.
Relations
• Superiorly: Coracoacromial arch, subacromial bursa,
supraspinatus and deltoid (Fig. 10.4c).
• Inferiorly: Long head of the triceps brachii, axillary
nerves and posterior circumflex humeral artery.
• Anteriorly: Subscapularis, coracobrachialis, short
head of biceps brachii and deltoid.
• Posteriorly: Infraspinatus, teres minor and deltoid.
• Within the joint: Tendon of the long head of the biceps
brachii.
Fig. 10.4c: Schematic sagittal section showing relations of the shoulder joint
--- Page 183 ---
UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
Blood Supply
1 Anterior circumflex humeral vessels
2 Posterior circumflex humeral vessels
3 Suprascapular vessels
4 Subscapular vessels
Nerve Supply
1 Axillary nerve
2 Musculocutaneous nerve
3 Suprascapular nerve
Movements of Shoulder Joint
The shoulder joint enjoys great freedom of mobility
at the cost of stability. There is no other joint in the
body which is more mobile than the shoulder joint. This
wide range of mobility is due to laxity of its fibrous
capsule, and the four times large size of the head of the
humerus as compared with the shallow glenoid cavity.
The range of movements is further increased by
concurrent movements of the shoulder girdle (Figs 10.5
and 10.6).
However, this large range of motion makes
glenohumeral joint more susceptible to dislocations,
instability, degenerative changes and other painful
conditions specially in individuals who perform
repetitive overhead motions (cricketers).
Movements of the shoulder joint are considered in
relation to the scapula rather than in relation to the sagittal
Figs 10.5a and b: Planes of movements of the shoulder joint:
(a) Flexion, extension, abduction, adduction, and (b) medial and
lateral rotations
and coronal planes (Fig. 10.5). When the arm is by the side
(in the resting position) the glenoid cavity faces almost
equally forwards and laterally; and the head of the
humerus faces medially and backwards. Keeping these
directions in mind, the movements are analysed as
follows.
1 Flexion and extension: During flexion, the arm moves
forwards and medially, and during extension, the
arm moves backwards and laterally. Thus flexion
and extension take place in a plane parallel to the
surface of the glenoid cavity (Figs 10.6a and b).
2 Abduction and adduction take place at right angles
to the plane of flexion and extension, i.e.
approximately midway between the sagittal and
coronal planes. In abduction, the arm moves
anterolaterally away from the trunk. This
movement is in the same plane as that of the body
of the scapula (Figs 10.6c and d).
3 Medial and lateral rotations are best demonstrated
with a midflexed elbow. In this position, the hand
is moved medially across the chest either in front
or behind the chest in medial rotation, and
laterally in lateral rotation of the shoulder joint
(Figs 10.6e and f).
4 Circumduction is a combination of different move-
ments as a result of which the hand moves along
a circle. The range of any movement depends on
the availability of an area of free articular surface
on the head of the humerus.
Muscles bringing about movements at shoulder joint
are shown in Table 10.1. Abduction has been analysed.
Analysis of the Overhead Movement of the Shoulder
The overhead movements of flexion and abduction of
the shoulder are brought about by smooth and
coordinate motion at all joints of the shoulder complex:
Glenohumeral, sternoclavicular, acromioclavicular, and
scapulothoracic. Only glenohumeral joint motion
cannot bring about the 180° of movement that takes
place in overhead shoulder movements. The scapula
contributes to overhead flexion and abduction by
rotating upwardly by 50°–60°. The glenohumeral joint
contributes 100°–120° of flexion and 90°–120° of abduc-
tion to the total 170°–180° of overhead movements. This
makes the overall ratio of 2° of motion of shoulder to
1° of scapulothoracic motion and is often referred to as
‘scapulohumeral rhythm’. Thus for every 15° of
elevation, 10° occur at shoulder joint and 5° are due to
movement of the scapula.
The humeral head undergoes lateral rotation at
around 90° of abduction to help clear the greater
tubercle under the acromion process. Although deltoid
is the main abductor of the shoulder, the rotator
muscles, namely the supraspinatus, infraspinatus, teres
--- Page 184 ---
JOINTS OF UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
DISSECTION
Having studied all the muscles at the upper end of the
scapula, it is wise to open and peep into the most mobile
shoulder joint.
Identify the muscles attached to the greater and
lesser tubercles of humerus. Deep to the acromion
process look for the subacromial bursa.
Identify coracoid process, acromion process and
triangular coracoacromial arch binding these two bones
together (see Fig. 6.7).
Trace the supraspinatus muscle from supraspinous
fossa of scapula to the greater tubercle of humerus. On
its way, it is intimately fused to the capsule of the shoulder
minor and the subscapularis play a very important role
in providing static and dynamic stability to the head of
the humerus. Thus the deltoid and these four muscles
constitute a ‘couple’ which permits true abduction in
the plane of the body of the scapula.
In addition, the scapular muscles such as trapezius,
serratus anterior, levator scapulae and rhomboids
provide stability and mobility to the scapula in the
coordinated overhead motion.
Serratus anterior is chiefly inserted into the inferior
angle of scapula. It rotates this angle laterally. At the
same time, trapezius rotates the medial border at root
of spine of scapula downwards. The synergic action of
these two muscles turns the glenoid cavity upwards
increasing the range of abduction at the shoulder joint.
Figs 10.6a to f: Movements of the shoulder joint: (a) Flexion, (b) extension, (c) abduction, (d) adduction, (e) medial rotation, (f) lateral
rotation
--- Page 185 ---
UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
Table 10.1: Muscles bringing about movements at the shoulder joint
Movements
Main muscles
Accessory muscles
1. Flexion
• Clavicular head of the pectoralis major
• Coracobrachialis
• Anterior fibres of deltoid
• Short head of biceps brachii
2. Extension
• Posterior fibres of deltoid
• Teres major
• Latissimus dorsi
• Long head of triceps brachii
• Sternocostal head of the pectoralis major
3. Adduction
• Pectoralis major
• Teres major
• Latissimus dorsi
• Coracobrachialis
• Short head of biceps brachii
• Long head of triceps brachii
4. Abduction
• Both supraspinatus and deltoid muscles initiate
abduction and are involved throughout the range of
abduction from 0°–90°.
• Serratus anterior 90°–180°
• Upper and lower fibres of trapezius 90°–180°
5. Medial rotation
• Pectoralis major
• Subscapularis
• Anterior fibres of deltoid
• Latissimus dorsi
• Teres major
6. Lateral rotation
• Posterior fibres of deltoid
• Infraspinatus
• Teres minor
joint. In the same way, tendons of infraspinatus and teres
minor also fuse with the posterior part of the capsule.
Inferiorly, trace the tendon of long head of triceps
brachii from the infraglenoid tubercle of scapula.
Cut through the subscapularis muscle at the neck of
scapula. It also gets fused with the anterior part of
capsule of the shoulder joint as it passes to the lesser
tubercle of humerus.
Having studied the structures related to shoulder
joint, the capsule of the joint is to be opened.
A vertical incision is given in the posterior part of the
capsule of the shoulder joint. The arm is rotated medially
and laterally. This helps in head of humerus getting
separated from the shallow glenoid cavity.
Inside the capsule, the shining tendon of long head of
biceps brachii is visible as it traverses the intertubercular
sulcus to reach the supraglenoid tubercle of scapula.
This tendon also gets continuous with the labrum
glenoidale attached to the rim of glenoid cavity.
CLINICAL ANATOMY
• The clavicle may be dislocated at either of its ends.
At the medial end, it is usually dislocated
forwards. Backward dislocation is rare as it is
prevented by the costoclavicular ligament.
• The main bond of union between the clavicle and
the manubrium is the articular disc. Apart from
its attachment to the joint capsule, the disc is also
attached above to the medial end of the clavicle,
and below to the manubrium. This prevents the
sternal end of the clavicle from tilting upwards
when the weight of the arm depresses the acromial
end (Fig. 10.1).
• The clavicle dislocates upwards at the acromio-
clavicular joint, because the clavicle overrides the
acromion process.
• The weight of the limb is transmitted from the
scapula to the clavicle through the coraco-
clavicular ligament, and from the clavicle to the
sternum through the sternoclavicular joint. Some
of the weight also passes to the first rib by the
costoclavicular ligament. The clavicle usually
fractures between these two ligaments (Fig. 10.1).
• Dislocation: The shoulder joint is more prone to
dislocation than any other joint. This is due to
laxity of the capsule and the disproportionate area
of the articular surfaces. Dislocation usually occurs
when the arm is abducted. In this position, the
head of the humerus presses against the lower
unsupported part of the capsular ligament. Thus
almost always the dislocation is primarily
subglenoid. Dislocation endangers the axillary
nerve which is closely related to the lower part of
the joint capsule (see Fig. 2.15).
• Optimum attitude: In order to avoid ankylosis,
many diseases of the shoulder joint are treated in
--- Page 186 ---
JOINTS OF UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
an optimum position of the joint. In this position,
the arm is abducted by 45°–90°.
• Shoulder tip pain: Irritation of the peritoneum
underlying diaphragm from any surrounding
pathology causes referred pain in the shoulder.
This is so because the phrenic nerve carrying
impulses from peritoneum and the supraclavicular
nerves (supplying the skin over the shoulder) both
arise from spinal segments C3, C4 (Figs 10.7a
and b).
• The shoulder joint is most commonly approached
(surgically) from the front. However, for
aspiration, the needle may be introduced either
anteriorly through the deltopectoral triangle
(closer to the deltoid), or laterally just below the
acromion process (Fig. 10.8).
• Frozen shoulder: This is a common occurrence.
Pathologically, the two layers of the synovial
membrane become adherent to each other.
Clinically, the patient (usually 40–60 years of age)
complains of progressively increasing pain in the
shoulder, stiffness in the joint and restriction of
all movements particularly external rotation,
abduction and medial rotation. As the contri-
bution of the glenohumeral joint is reduced, the
patient shows altered scapulohumeral rhythm due
to excessive use of scapular motion while
performing overhead flexion and abduction.
The surrounding muscles show disuse atrophy.
The disease is self-limiting and the patient may
recover spontaneously in about two years and
much earlier by physiotherapy.
• Shoulder joint disease can be excluded, if the
patient can raise both his arms above the head and
bring the two palms together (Fig. 10.9). Deltoid
muscle and axillary nerve are likely to be intact.
Figs 10.7a and b: (a) Shoulder tip pain. Other sites of referred pain also shown, and (b) anatomical basis of referred pain
Fig. 10.8: Site of aspiration of shoulder joint
--- Page 187 ---
UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
Competency achievement: The student should be able to:
AN 13.3 Identify and describe the type, articular surfaces, capsule,
synovial membrane, ligaments, relations, movements, blood and
nerve supply of elbow joint, proximal and distal radioulnar joints,
wrist joint and first carpometacarpal joint.3
ELBOW JOINT
Features
The elbow joint is a hinge variety of synovial joint
between the lower end of humerus and the upper ends
of radius and ulna bones.
Elbow joint is the term used for humeroradial and
humeroulnar joints. The term elbow complex also
includes the superior radioulnar joint also.
Articular Surfaces
Upper
The capitulum and trochlea of the humerus.
The coronoid fossa lies just above the trochlea and is
designed in a manner that the coronoid process of ulna
fits into it in extreme flexion. Similarly, the radial fossa
just above the capitulum allows for radial head fitting
in the radial fossa in extreme flexion.
Lower
i. Upper surface of the head of the radius articulates
with the capitulum.
ii. Trochlear notch of the ulna articulates with the
trochlea of the humerus (Fig. 10.10).
The elbow joint is continuous with the superior
radioulnar joint. The humeroradial, the humeroulnar
and the superior radioulnar joints are together known
as cubital articulations.
Ligaments
1 Capsular ligament: Superiorly, it is attached to the lower
end of the humerus in such a way that the capitulum,
the trochlea, the radial fossa, the coronoid fossa and
the olecranon fossa are intracapsular. Inferomedially,
it is attached to the margin of the trochlear notch of
the ulna except laterally; inferolaterally, it is attached
to the annular ligament of the superior radioulnar
joint. The synovial membrane lines the capsule and
the fossae, named above.
The anterior ligament, and the posterior ligament are
thickenings of the capsule.
DANCING SHOULDER
When one flexes the arm at shoulder joint,
there is one small point
which you must remember;
whether it is July or November
there is a gamble of two muscles
Pectoralis major and Anterior deltoid in the tussles.
To Teres major, Latissimus dorsi was happily married
but while extending, these got joined with Posterior deltoid.
In adduction of course,
the joint decided a better course.
It went off with two majors (Pectoralis major and Teres
major),
On the way they stopped for some gazers,
The two majors danced with Subscapularis
during medial rotation,
Even Anterior deltoid and Latissimus dorsi,
soon joined the happy flirtation
If one wants the joint to laterally rotate,
then there is difference in the mate.
Posterior deltoid dances with Infraspinatus,
Even Teres minor comes and triangulates.
When just abduction is desired,
Supraspinatus and Mid-deltoid are required.
But if Kapil Dev has to do the bowling
come Trapezius and Serratus anterior following.
Small muscles provide stability
Large ones give it mobility
And shoulder joint dances,
dances and dances.
Fig. 10.9: Exclusion of shoulder joint disease
--- Page 188 ---
JOINTS OF UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
2 The ulnar collateral ligament is triangular in shape
(Fig. 10.11). Its apex is attached to the medial
epicondyle of the humerus, and its base to the ulna.
The ligament has thick anterior and posterior bands:
These are attached below to the coronoid process and
the olecranon process, respectively. Their lower ends
are joined to each other by an oblique band which
gives attachment to the thinner intermediate fibres
of the ligament. The ligament is crossed by the ulnar
nerve and it gives origin to the flexor digitorum
superficialis. It is closely related to the flexor carpi
ulnaris and the triceps brachii.
3 The radial collateral or lateral ligament: It is a fan-shaped
band extending from the lateral epicondyle to the
annular ligament. It gives origin to the supinator and
to the extensor carpi radialis brevis (Fig. 10.12).
Relations
• Anteriorly: Brachialis, median nerve, brachial artery
and tendon of biceps brachii.
• Posteriorly: Triceps brachii and anconeus.
• Medially: Ulnar nerve, flexor carpi ulnaris and
common flexors.
• Laterally: Supinator, extensor carpi radialis brevis and
other common extensors.
Blood Supply
From anastomoses around the elbow joint (see Fig. 8.10).
Nerve Supply
The joint receives branches from the following nerves.
i. Ulnar nerve
ii. Median nerve
iii. Radial nerve
iv. Musculocutaneous nerve through its branch to the
brachialis
Movements
1 Flexion is brought about by:
i. Brachialis (see Fig. 8.6)
ii. Biceps brachii
iii. Brachioradialis
Fig. 10.10: The cubital articulations, including the elbow and
superior radioulnar joints
Fig. 10.11: The ulnar collateral ligament of the elbow joint
showing anterior, posterior and oblique bands
Fig. 10.12: The radial collateral ligament of the elbow joint
--- Page 189 ---
UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
2 Extension is produced by:
i. Triceps brachii (Fig. 10.13)
ii. Anconeus
Carrying Angle
The transverse axis of the elbow joint is directed
medially and downwards. Because of this, the extended
forearm is not in straight line with the arm, but makes
an angle of about 13° with it. This is known as the
carrying angle. The factors responsible for formation
of the carrying angle are as follows.
a. The medial flange of the trochlea is 6 mm deeper
than the lateral flange.
b. The superior articular surface of the coronoid process
of the ulna is placed oblique to the long axis of the
bone.
The carrying angle disappears in full flexion of the
elbow, and also during pronation of the forearm. The
forearm comes into line with the arm in the midprone
position, and this is the position in which the hand is
mostly used. This arrangement of gradually increasing
carrying angle during extension of the elbow increases
the precision with which the hand (and objects held in
it) can be controlled. The angle is 10°–15° in males
(Fig. 10.14a) and more than 15° in females (Fig. 10.14b).
DISSECTION
Cut through the muscles arising from the lateral and
medial epicondyles of humerus and reflect them distally,
if not already done. Also cut through biceps brachii,
brachialis and triceps brachii 3 cm proximal to the elbow
joint and reflect them distally.
Remove all the muscles fused with the fibrous
capsule of the elbow joint and define its attachments
(refer to BDC App).
CLINICAL ANATOMY
• Distension of the elbow joint by an effusion
occurs posteriorly because here the capsule is
weak and the covering deep fascia is thin.
Aspiration is done posteriorly on any side of the
olecranon process (Fig. 10.15).
• Dislocation of the elbow is usually posterior, and
is often associated with fracture of the coronoid
process. The triangular relationship between the
olecranon process and the two humeral
epicondyles is lost (see Fig. 2.17).
• Subluxation of the head of the radius (pulled elbow)
occurs in children when the forearm is suddenly
pulled in pronation. The head of the radius slips
out from the annular ligament (see Fig. 2.25).
• Tennis elbow occurs in tennis players. Abrupt
pronation with fully extended elbow may lead to
pain and tenderness over the lateral epicondyle
which gives attachment to common extensor
origin (Fig. 10.16a). This is possibly due to:
a. Sprain of radial collateral ligament.
b. Tearing of fibres of the extensor carpi radialis
brevis.
c. Recent researches have pointed out that it is
more of a degenerative condition rather than
inflammatory condition.
• Student’s (miner’s) elbow is characterised by
effusion into the bursa over the subcutaneous
posterior surface of the olecranon process.
Students during lectures support their head (for
sleeping) with their hands with flexed elbows. The
bursa on the olecranon process gets inflamed
(Fig. 10.16b).
• Golfer’s elbow is the microtrauma of medial
epicondyle of humerus, occurs commonly in golf
players. The common flexor origin undergoes
Fig. 10.13: Triceps brachii
--- Page 190 ---
JOINTS OF UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
Fig. 10.16b: Student’s elbow
Fig. 10.16a: Tennis elbow
Fig. 10.15: Aspiration of elbow joint
repetitive strain and results in a painful condition
on the medial side of the elbow (Fig. 10.17).
• If carrying angle (normal is 13°) is more, the
condition is cubitus valgus, ulnar nerve may get
stretched leading to weakness of intrinsic muscles
of hand. If the angle is less, it is called cubitus
varus (Fig. 10.18).
• Under optimal position of the elbow: Generally
elbow flexion between 30° and 40° is sufficient
to perform common activities of daily living such
as eating, combing, dressing, etc. Because of this
reason even people who have lost terminal
flexion or extension after a fracture/trauma are
able to accomplish these personal tasks without
much problems.
Figs 10.14a and b: Carrying angle: (a) 10°–15° in males, and (b) more than 15° in females
--- Page 191 ---
UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
Table 10.2: Radioulnar joints (Fig. 10.19)
Features
Superior radioulnar joint
Inferior radioulnar joint
Type
Pivot type of synovial joint
Pivot type of synovial joint
Articular surfaces
• Circumference of head of radius
• Head of ulna
• Osseofibrous ring, formed by the radial notch of
• Ulnar notch of radius
the ulna and the annular ligament
Ligaments
• The annular ligament forms four-fifths of the ring
• The capsule surrounds the joint. The weak upper
within which the head of the radius rotates. It is
part is evaginated by the synovial membrane
attached to the margins of the radial notch of the
to form a recess (recessus sacciformis) in front
ulna, and is continuous with the capsule of the
of the interosseous membrane
elbow joint above
• The quadrate ligament extends from the neck of
• The apex of triangular fibrocartilaginous articular
the radius to the lower margin of the radial notch of
disc is attached to the base of the styloid
the ulna
process of the ulna, and the base to the lower
margin of the ulnar notch of the radius (Fig. 10.20)
Blood supply
Anastomoses around the lateral side of the elbow
Anterior and posterior interosseous arteries
joint
Nerve supply
Musculocutaneous, median, and radial nerves
Anterior and posterior interosseous nerves
Movements
Supination and pronation
Supination and pronation
downwards and medially from the radius to ulna
(Fig. 10.19). The two bones are also connected by the
oblique cord which extends from the tuberosity of the
radius to the tuberosity of the ulna. The direction of its
fibres is opposite to that in the interosseous membrane.
1 Superiorly, the interosseous membrane begins 2–3 cm
below the radial tuberosity. Between the oblique cord
and the interosseous membrane, there is a gap for
passage of the posterior interosseous vessels to the
back of the forearm.
2 Inferiorly, a little above its lower margin, there is an
aperture for the passage of the anterior interosseous
vessels to the back of the forearm.
Fig. 10.17: Golfer’s elbow
RADIOULNAR JOINTS
Features
The radius and the ulna are joined to each other at the
superior and inferior radioulnar joints. These are
described in Table 10.2. The radius and ulna are also
connected by the interosseous membrane which
constitutes middle radioulnar joint (Fig. 10.19).
INTEROSSEOUS MEMBRANE
The interosseous membrane connects the shafts of the
radius and ulna. It is attached to the interosseous
borders of these bones. The fibres of the membrane run
Fig. 10.18: Normal, cubitus valgus, and cubitus varus
--- Page 192 ---
JOINTS OF UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
is attached to posterior border of medial surface at
lower end of radius.
The interosseous membrane performs the following
functions.
a. It binds the radius and ulna to each other.
b. It provides attachments to many muscles.
c. It transmits forces (including weight) applied to
the radius (through the hand) to the ulna. This
transmission is necessary as radius is the main
bone taking part in the wrist joint, while the ulna
is the main bone taking part in the elbow joint
(see Fig. 1.2 and Flowchart 1.1).
d. Separates the forearm into flexor and extensor
compartments.
SUPINATION AND PRONATION
Supination and pronation are rotatory movements of the
forearm/hand around a vertical axis. In a semiflexed
elbow, the palm is turned upwards in supination, and
downwards in pronation (kings pronate, beggars
supinate). The movements are permitted at the superior
and inferior radioulnar joints.
During pronation, head of radius spins within
annular ligament. As radius with the hand comes
medially across the lower part of ulna, the interosseous
membrane is spiralised. During supination, the
membrane is despiralised.
The vertical axis of movement of the radius passes
through the centre of the head of the radius above,
and through the ulnar attachment of the articular disc
below (Fig. 10.19). However, this axis is not
stationary because the lower end of the ulna is not
fixed: It moves backwards and laterally during
pronation, and forwards and medially during
supination. As a result of this movement, the axis
(defined above) is displaced laterally in pronation,
and medially in supination.
Supination is more powerful than pronation because
it is an antigravity movement. Supination movements
are responsible for all screwing movements of the hand,
e.g. as in tightening nuts and bolts. Morphologically,
pronation and supination were evolved for picking up
food and taking it to the mouth.
Around 50° of supination and 50° of pronation are
generally required to perform many of the routine
activities.
Pronation is brought about chiefly by the pronator
quadratus. It is aided by the pronator teres when the
movement is rapid and against resistance. Gravity also
helps (Fig. 10.21).
Supination is brought about by the supinator muscle
and the biceps brachii. Slow supination, with elbow
extended, is done by the supinator. Rapid supination
with the elbow flexed, and when performed against
3 The anterior surface is related to the flexor pollicis
longus, the flexor digitorum profundus, the pronator
quadratus, and to the anterior interosseous vessels
and nerve (see Fig. 2.22).
4 The posterior surface (see Fig. 9.55) is related to the
supinator, the abductor pollicis longus, the extensor
pollicis brevis, the extensor pollicis longus, the
extensor indicis, the anterior interosseous artery and
the posterior interosseous nerve.
MIDDLE RADIOULNAR JOINT
Type: Syndesmosis, joined by interosseous membrane
attached to interosseous borders of radius and ulna. It
Fig. 10.20: Triangular fibrocartilaginous disc of inferior radio-
ulnar joint
Fig. 10.19: Radioulnar joints
--- Page 193 ---
UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
Figs 10.23a and b: (a) Supination, and (b) pronation
Fig. 10.22: Supinators of the forearm
resistance, is done mainly by the biceps brachii
(Fig. 10.22).
Fig. 10.21: Pronators of the forearm
DISSECTION
Remove all the muscles covering the adjacent sides of
radius, ulna and the intervening interosseous membrane.
This will expose the superior and inferior radioulnar joints
including the interosseous membrane.
Cut through the annular ligament to see the superior
radioulnar joint.
Clean and define the interosseous membrane. Lastly
cut through the capsule of inferior radioulnar joint to locate
the intra-articular fibrocartilaginous disc of the joint.
Learn the movements of supination and pronation
on dry bones and on yourself (refer to BDC App).
CLINICAL ANATOMY
Supination and pronation: During supination, the
radius and ulna are parallel to each other. During
pronation, radius crosses over the ulna (Figs 10.23a
and b). In synostosis (fusion) of upper end of radius
and ulna, pronation is not possible.
WRIST (RADIOCARPAL) JOINT
Type
Wrist joint is a synovial joint of the ellipsoid variety
between lower end of radius and articular disc of
inferior radioulnar joint proximally and three lateral
bones of proximal row of carpus, i.e. scaphoid, lunate
and triquetral distally.
--- Page 194 ---
JOINTS OF UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
The palmar ulnocarpal ligament is a rounded
fasciculus. It begins above from the base of the styloid
process of the ulna and the anterior margin of the
articular disc, runs downwards and laterally, and is
attached to the lunate and triquetral bones.
Both the palmar carpal ligaments are considered
to be intracapsular.
3 On the dorsal aspect of the joint, there is one dorsal
radiocarpal ligament. It is weaker than the palmar
ligaments. It begins above from the posterior margin
of the lower end of the radius, runs downwards and
medially, and is attached below to the dorsal surfaces of
the scaphoid, lunate and triquetral bones (Fig. 10.25).
4 The radial collateral ligament extends from the tip of
the styloid process of the radius to the lateral side of
the scaphoid bone. It is related to the radial artery.
5 The ulnar collateral ligament extends from the tip of
the styloid process of the ulna to the triquetral and
pisiform bones.
Both the collateral ligaments are poorly developed.
Relations
• Anterior: Long flexor tendons with their synovial
sheaths, and median nerve (see Fig. 9.7).
• Posterior: Extensor tendons of the wrist and fingers
with their synovial sheaths (see Figs 9.52b and c).
• Lateral: Radial artery (see Fig. 9.33).
Blood Supply
Anterior and posterior carpal arches.
Nerve Supply
Anterior and posterior interosseous nerves.
The pisiform does not play a role in the radiocarpal
articulation. It is a sesamoid bone acting as a pulley for
flexor carpi ulnaris.
Articular Surfaces
Upper
1 Inferior surface of the lower end of the radius
(Fig. 10.24).
2 Articular disc of the inferior radioulnar joint
(Fig. 10.24).
Lower
1 Scaphoid
2 Lunate
3 Triquetral bones
Ligaments
1 The articular capsule surrounds the joint. It is attached
above to the lower ends of the radius and ulna, and
below to the proximal row of carpal bones. A protru-
sion of synovial membrane, called the recessus
sacciformis, lies in front of the styloid process of the
ulna and in front of the articular disc. It is bounded
inferiorly by a small meniscus projecting inwards
from the ulnar collateral ligament between the
styloid process and the triquetral bone. The fibrous
capsule is strengthened by the following ligaments.
2 On the palmar aspect, there are two palmar carpal
ligaments.
The palmar radiocarpal ligament is a broad band. It
begins above from the anterior margin of the lower
end of the radius and its styloid process, runs
downwards and medially, and is attached below to
the anterior surfaces of the scaphoid, the lunate and
triquetral bones.
Fig. 10.24: Cavity of wrist, inferior radioulnar, intercarpal and 1st carpometacarpal joints
--- Page 195 ---
UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
Figs 10.27a and b: (a) Extensor digitorum, and (b) extensor
digiti minimi
Movements
Movements at the radiocarpal joints are accompanied
by movements at the midcarpal joint. The midcarpal
joint is anatomically separate from radiocarpal joint.
The joint between the two rows of carpal bones does
not have smooth joint line because of multiple small
joints. However, it still behaves as a functional unit in
all movements of the wrist joint.
In addition to the congruency and the shape of the
articular surfaces of radius and carpal bones, the length
of the ulna can also affect the amount of motion
available at the wrist joint. In the ulnar negative
variance, the distal end of ulna is shorter than the radius
and vice versa in ulnar positive variance. The wrist joint
has the following movements.
1 Flexion: It takes place more at the midcarpal than
at the wrist joint. The main flexors are:
i. Flexor carpi radialis (Figs 10.26a and b)
ii. Flexor carpi ulnaris
iii. Palmaris longus.
The movement is assisted by long flexors of the
fingers and thumb (Figs 10.34a and b), and abductor
pollicis longus.
2 Extension: It takes place mainly at the wrist joint.
The main extensors are:
i. Extensor carpi radialis longus
ii. Extensor carpi radialis brevis
iii. Extensor carpi ulnaris.
It is assisted by the extensors of the fingers and
thumb (Figs 10.27a and b).
Fig. 10.25: Some ligaments of the wrist
Figs 10.26a and b: Flexors of the wrist
--- Page 196 ---
JOINTS OF UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
Fig. 10.30: Aspiration of the wrist joint
Fig. 10.29: Ganglion cyst at the back of wrist
3 Abduction (radial deviation): It occurs mainly at the
midcarpal joint. The main abductors are:
i. Flexor carpi radialis
ii. Extensor carpi radialis longus and extensor
carpi radialis brevis
iii. Abductor pollicis longus and extensor pollicis
brevis
4 Adduction (ulnar deviation): It occurs mainly at the
wrist joint. The main adductors are:
i. Flexor carpi ulnaris
ii. Extensor carpi ulnaris
5 Circumduction: The range of flexion is more than
that of extension. Similarly, the range of adduction
is greater than abduction (due to the shorter
styloid process of ulna).
DISSECTION
Cut through the thenar and hypothenar muscles from
their origins and reflect them distally.
Separate the flexor and extensor retinacula of the
wrist from the bones.
Cut through flexor and extensor tendons (if not already
done) and reflect them distally (refer to BDC App).
Define the capsular attachments and ligaments and
relations of the wrist joint.
CLINICAL ANATOMY
• The wrist joint and interphalangeal joints are
commonly involved in rheumatoid arthritis
(Figs 10.28a and b).
Figs 10.28a and b: Rheumatoid arthritis leading to deformities
• The back of the wrist is the common site for a
ganglion. It is a cystic swelling resulting from
mucoid degeneration of synovial sheaths around
the tendons (Fig. 10.29).
• The wrist joint can be aspirated from the posterior
surface between the tendons of the extensor pollicis
longus and the extensor digitorum (Fig. 10.30).
• The joint is immobilised in optimum position of
30° dorsiflexion (extension).
• Because of the complex nature of the joint and the
multiple articulations, any injury to the ligaments
attached to the proximal or the distal row of carpal
bones may cause subluxation of the carpals
ventrally or dorsally leading to painful condition
of the wrist.
--- Page 197 ---
UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
3 The anterior ligament
4 The posterior ligaments are oblique bands running
downwards and medially.
Relations
• Anteriorly: The joint is covered by the muscles of the
thenar eminence (see Fig. 9.22).
• Posteriorly: Long and short extensors of the thumb
(Figs 10.32a and b).
• Medially: First dorsal interosseous muscle, and the
radial artery (passing from the dorsal to the palmar
aspect of the hand through the interosseous space).
• Laterally: Tendon of the abductor pollicis longus.
Blood Supply
Radial vessels supply blood to the synovial membrane
and capsule of the joint.
Nerve Supply
First digital branch of median nerve supplies the
capsule of the joint.
Movements
Flexion and extension of the thumb take place in the
plane of the palm, and abduction and adduction at right
angles to the plane of the palm. In opposition, the thumb
crosses the palm and touches other fingers. Flexion is
associated with medial rotation, and extension with
lateral rotation at the joint.
Circumduction is a combination of different move-
ments mentioned. The following muscles bring about
the movements (Figs 10.31a to e).
1 Flexion
• Flexor pollicis brevis (see Fig. 9.20)
• Opponens pollicis
2 Extension
• Extensor pollicis brevis (Fig. 10.32a)
• Extensor pollicis longus (Fig. 10.32b)
3 Abduction
• Abductor pollicis brevis (see Fig. 9.20)
• Abductor pollicis longus
4 Adduction
Adductor pollicis (see Fig. 9.22)
5 Opposition
• Opponens pollicis (see Fig. 9.22)
• Flexor pollicis brevis
The opposition is a sequential movement of
abduction, flexion, adduction of the 1st metacarpal with
simultaneous rotation. Opposition is unique to human
beings and is one of the most important movements of
the hand considering that this motion is used in almost
all types of gripping actions.
The adductor pollicis and the flexor pollicis longus
exert pressure on the opposed fingers.
Competency achievement: The student should be able to:
AN 13.4 Describe sternoclavicular joint, acromioclavicular joint,
carpometacarpal joints and metacarpophalangeal joint.4
JOINTS OF HAND
INTERCARPAL, CARPOMETACARPAL AND
INTERMETACARPAL JOINTS
There are three joint cavities among the intercarpal,
carpometacarpal and intermetacarpal joints, which are:
1 Pisotriquetral,
2 First carpometacarpal, and
3 A common cavity for the rest of the joints. The
common cavity may be described as the midcarpal
(transverse intercarpal) joint between the proximal
and distal rows of the carpus, which communicates
with intercarpal joints superiorly, and with
intercarpal, carpometacarpal and intermetacarpal
joints inferiorly (Figs 10.24a and b).
The midcarpal joint permits movements between the
two rows of the carpus as already described with the
wrist joint.
Competency achievement: The student should be able to:
AN 12.6 Describe and demonstrate movements of thumb and
muscles involved.5
FIRST CARPOMETACARPAL JOINT (JOINT OF THUMB)
First carpometacarpal joint is only carpometacarpal
joint which has a separate joint cavity. Movements at
this joint are, therefore, much more free than at any
other corresponding joint.
Type
Saddle variety of synovial joint (because the articular
surfaces are concavoconvex).
Articular Surfaces
i. The distal surface of the trapezium
ii. The proximal surface of the base of the first
metacarpal bone.
The articulating surface of trapezium is concave in
the sagittal plane and convex in the frontal plane.
The concavoconvex nature of the articular surfaces
permits a wide range of movements (Fig. 10.24).
Ligaments
1 Capsular ligament surrounds the joint. In general, it
is thick but loose, and is thickest dorsally and
laterally.
2 Lateral ligament is broad band which strengthens
the capsule laterally.
--- Page 198 ---
JOINTS OF UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
DISSECTION
Out of these, the most important joint with a separate
joint cavity is the first carpometacarpal joint. This is the
joint of the thumb and a wide variety of functionally
useful movements take place here. Identify the distal
surface of trapezium and base of first metacarpal bone.
Define the metacarpophalangeal and interphalangeal
joints.
For their dissection, remove all the muscles and
tendons from the anterior and posterior aspects of any
two metacarpophalangeal joints. Define the articular
capsule and ligaments. Do the same for proximal and
distal interphalangeal joints of one of the fingers and
define the ligaments (refer to BDC App).
CLINICAL ANATOMY
• The 1st carpometacarpal joint can undergo
degenerative changes with age which is a painful
condition of the base of the thumb.
• The synovial lining of the tendons of extensor
pollicis brevis and abductor pollicis longus can
get inflamed due to repetitive strain and can lead
to a painful condition called De Quervain’s
tenosynovitis. Movement of the thumb can
aggravate pain in this condition.
METACARPOPHALANGEAL JOINTS
Type
Metacarpophalangeal joints are synovial joints of the
ellipsoid variety.
Ligaments
Each joint has the following ligaments.
1 Capsular ligament: This is thick in front and thin
behind.
2 Palmar ligament: This is a strong fibrocartilaginous
plate (volar plate) which replaces the anterior part
of the capsule. It is more firmly attached to the
phalanx than to the metacarpal. The various palmar
ligaments of the metacarpophalangeal joints are
joined to one another by the deep transverse
metacarpal ligament.
3 Medial and lateral collateral ligaments: These are
oblique bands placed at the sides of the joint. Each
runs downwards and forwards from the head of the
metacarpal bone to the base of the phalanx. These
are taut in flexion and relaxed in extension.
Movements at First Joint and Muscles Producing Them
1 Flexion: Flexor pollicis longus and flexor pollicis brevis.
2 Extension: Extensor pollicis longus and extensor
pollicis brevis (Figs 10.32a and b).
3 Abduction: Abductor pollicis brevis (see Fig. 9.20).
4 Adduction: Adductor pollicis (see Fig. 9.22).
Movements at Second to Fifth
Joints and Muscles Producing Them
1 Flexion: Interossei and lumbricals (see Figs 9.21 and 9.23).
2 Extension: Extensors of the fingers (Fig. 10.27).
3 Abduction: Dorsal interossei (see Fig. 9.23).
4 Adduction: Palmar interossei (see Fig. 9.23).
5 Circumduction: Above muscles in sequence.
INTERPHALANGEAL JOINTS (PROXIMAL AND DISTAL)
Type
Hinge variety of synovial joints (Fig. 10.33).
Ligaments
Similar to the metacarpophalangeal joints, that is one
palmar fibrocartilaginous ligament and two collateral
bands running downwards and forwards.
Figs 10.31a to e: Movements of the thumb
--- Page 199 ---
UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
Movements at Second to Fifth Digits
1 Flexion: Flexor digitorum superficialis at the proximal
interphalangeal joint, and the flexor digitorum
profundus at the distal joint (Fig. 10.34).
2 Extension: Interossei and lumbricals (see Figs 9.21
and 9.23).
Segmental Innervation of Movements of Upper Limb
Figures 10.35a to f show the segments of the spinal cord
responsible for movements of the various joints of the
upper limb.
The proximal muscles of upper limb are supplied
by proximal nerve roots forming brachial plexus and
distal muscles by the distal or lower nerve roots. In
shoulder, abduction is done by muscles supplied by
C5 spinal segment and adduction by muscles
innervated by C6, C7 spinal segments.
Elbow joint is flexed by C5, C6 and extended by C7,
C8 innervated muscles. Supination is caused by muscle
innervated by C6 spinal segment even pronation is done
through C6 spinal segment.
Extension and flexion of wrist is done through C6,
C7 spinal segments. Both the palmar and dorsal
interossei are innervated by T1 spinal segment.
The interphalangeal joints also are flexed and
extended by same spinal segments, i.e. C7, C8.
Figs 10.34a and b: (a) Flexor digitorum superficialis, and
(b) flexor digitorum profundus
Movements at Interphalangeal Joint of Thumb
Flexion: Flexor pollicis longus.
Extension: Extensor pollicis longus.
Figs 10.32a and b: Extensors of the joints of thumb
Fig. 10.33: Joints of the fingers
--- Page 200 ---
JOINTS OF UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
Mnemonics
Elbow: Muscles that flex it
Three Bs Bend the elBow:
Brachialis
Biceps—2 heads
Brachioradialis
FACTS TO REMEMBER
• Sternoclavicular joint is a saddle variety of synovial
joint. Its cavity is divided into two parts by an
articular disc.
• Movements of shoulder girdle help the movements
of shoulder joint during 90°–180° abduction.
• Shoulder joint is freely mobile and is vulnerable
to dislocation.
Figs 10.35a to f: Segmental innervation of movements of the
upper limb
• Ulnar nerve lies behind medial epicondyle. It is
not a content of the cubital fossa.
• Carrying angle separates the wrist from the hip
joint while carrying buckets, etc.
• Biceps brachii is an important supinator of forearm
when the elbow is flexed.
• Kings pronate, while beggars supinate.
• Movements of pronation and supination are not
occurring at the elbow or wrist joints.
• First carpometacarpal joint is the most important
joint as it permits the thumb to oppose the palm/
fingers for holding things.
• Shoulder joint commonly dislocates inferiorly.
• Ulnar nerve lies behind medial epicondyle,
pressing the nerve cause tingling sensation. That
is why the bone is named ‘humerus’.
• Giving is pronation, receiving is supination.
Picking up food with digits is pronation, putting
it in the mouth is supination.
• Axis of movements of abduction and adduction
of fingers is through the centre of the middle finger.
CLINICOANATOMICAL PROBLEM
A 70-year-old lady fell on her left forearm. She heard
a crack in the wrist. There was swelling and a bend
just proximal to wrist with lateral deviation of the
hand.
• Which forearm bone is fractured?
• Reason of bend just proximal to wrist.
• What joints can be subluxated?
Ans: There is fracture of the distal end of radius. The
backward bend just proximal to the wrist is due to
the pull of extensor muscles on the distal segment of
radius. The inferior radioulnar joint is usually
subluxated.
FURTHER READING
• Abrams RA, Peterson M, Botte MJ. Arthroscopic portals of
the wrist: An anatomic study. J Hand Surg 1994;19A:940–44.
A review of the surface and intra-articular anatomy of the wrist,
the technique of establishing a safe portal and the specific uses of
the radiocarpal, metacarpal and special-use portals.
• Burkart AC, Debski RE. Anatomy and function of
glenohumeral ligaments in anterior shoulder instability. Clin
Orthopaed Related Res 2002;400:32.
• An KN, Berger RA, Coonery WB (eds). Biomechanics of Wrist
Joint. New York Springer-Verlag, 1991.
• Garg K, Batra V. Dancing shoulder. J Anat Soc India 1991;
40(2):119–20.
1–5 From Medical Council of India, Competency based Undergraduate Curriculum for the Indian Medical Graduate, 2018;1:44–80.
--- Page 201 ---
UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
1. Describe the shoulder joint under the following
headings:
a. Type
b. Articular surface
c. Ligaments
d. Movements with their muscles
e. Clinical anatomy
2. Tabulate the features of superior and inferior radio-
ulnar joints.
3. Write short notes on:
a. Carrying angle
b. Movements of the thumb with muscles
responsible for these movements.
c. Movements of wrist. Enumerate the muscles
causing these movements.
d. Movements occurring at the shoulder girdle.
e. Movements at metacarpophalangeal joint of
middle finger with the muscles responsible for
them.
1. One of the following muscles is not a medial rotator
of the shoulder joint:
a. Pectoralis major
b. Teres major
c. Teres minor
d. Latissimus dorsi
2. What type of joint is superior radioulnar joint?
a. Pivot
b. Saddle
c. Plane
d. Hinge
3. First carpometacarpal joint is:
a. Saddle
b. Ellipsoid
c. Hinge
d. Pivot
4. Articular surface of sternal end of clavicle is covered
a. Fibrocartilage
b. Hyaline cartilage
c. Elastic cartilage
d. None of the above
5. Which of the following joints contains an articular
disc?
a. Sternoclavicular
b. Superior radioulnar
c. Shoulder
d. Elbow
6. Which of the following muscles causes protraction
of scapula?
a. Serratus anterior
b. Levator scapulae
c. Trapezius
d. Latissimus dorsi
7. Which of the following muscles is supplied by two
nerves with different root values?
a. Flexor pollicis longus
b. Pronator teres
c. Flexor digitorum superficialis
d. Flexor digitorum profundus
8. Trapezius retracts the scapula along with which of
the following muscles?
a. Rhomboids
b. Latissimus dorsi
c. Serratus anterior
d. Levator scapulae
9. Which of the following muscles is flexor, adductor
and medial rotator of shoulder joint?
a. Pectoralis minor
b. Pectoralis major
c. Teres minor
d. Infraspinatus
1. c
2. a
3. a
4. a
5. a
6. a
7. d
8. a
9. b
--- Page 202 ---
JOINTS OF UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
• What type of joint is sternoclavicular joint?
• Name the ligaments of sternoclavicular joint.
• Where are the attachments of coracoclavicular
ligament?
• Name the movements of shoulder girdle.
• Which muscles cause lateral rotation of the shoulder
girdle?
• Mark the attachment of capsule of shoulder joint.
• Which tendon is intracapsular in the shoulder joint?
• Which muscles cause abduction and lateral rotation
of shoulder joint? Show these movements.
• What type of joint is elbow joint?
• What type of joints are superior and inferior radio-
ulnar joints?
• Name the functions of interosseous membrane.
• Name the supinators and pronators of the forearm
with their nerve supply.
• Name the movements occurring at the wrist joint.
• Name bones participating in the 1st carpometacarpal
joint. Show the movements of this joint.
• How many joint cavities are there amongst the
intercarpal, carpometacarpal and intermetacarpal
joints?
• Which is the only muscle causing flexion of distal
interphalangeal joints of the fingers?
--- Page 203 ---
UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
INTRODUCTION
Surface marking is the projection of the deeper
structures on the surface. Its importance lies in various
medical and surgical procedures.
SURFACE MARKING
The bony landmarks seen in different regions of the
upper limb have been described in appropriate
sections.
The surface marking of important structures is given
in this chapter.
Competency achievement: The student should be able to:
AN 13.7 Identify and demonstrate surface projection of—cephalic
and basilic vein, palpation of brachial artery, radial artery; testing
of muscles—trapezius, pectoralis major, serratus anterior, latissimus
dorsi, deltoid, biceps brachii, brachioradialis.1
ARTERIES
Axillary Artery
Hold the arm at right angles to the trunk with the palm
directed upwards. The artery is then marked as a
straight line by joining the following two points.
• Point 1: Midpoint of the clavicle.
• Point 2: At the lower limit of the lateral wall of axilla
where the arterial pulsations can be felt in living
person (Fig. 11.1).
At its termination, the axillary artery, along with the
accompanying nerves, forms a prominence which lies
behind another projection caused by the biceps and
coracobrachialis.
Brachial Artery
Brachial artery is marked by joining the following two
points.
Surface Marking, Radiological
Anatomy and Comparison of
Upper and Lower Limbs
Happiness doesn’t result from what we get,
but from what we give. Do your best and let God do the rest 
—Ben Carson
Fig. 11.1: Axillary and brachial arteries with musculocutaneous
nerve
• Point 1: At the lower limit of the lateral wall of the
axilla. Here the axillary artery ends and the brachial
artery begins (Fig. 11.2).
Fig. 11.2: Median nerve in front of arm related to axillary and
brachial arteries
--- Page 204 ---
SURFACE MARKING, RADIOLOGICAL ANATOMY AND COMPARISON OF UPPER AND LOWER LIMBS
Upper Limb
Section 1
• Point 2: At the level of the neck of the radius medial
to the tendon of the biceps brachii (Fig. 11.2).
Thus the artery begins on the medial side of the
upper part of the arm, and runs downwards and
slightly laterally to end in front of the elbow. At its
termination, it bifurcates into the radial and ulnar
arteries.
Radial Artery
In the Forearm
Radial artery is marked by joining the following points.
• Point 1: In front of the elbow at the level of the neck
of the radius medial to the tendon of the biceps
brachii (Fig. 11.3).
• Point 2: At the wrist between the anterior border of
the radius laterally and the tendon of the flexor carpi
radialis medially, where the radial pulse is
commonly felt (Fig. 11.3).
Its course is curved with a gentle convexity to the
lateral side.
In the Hand
Radial artery is marked by joining the following points.
• Point 1: Just below the tip of the styloid process of
the radius (Fig. 11.4).
• Point 2: At the proximal end of the first inter-
metacarpal space (Fig. 11.4).
In this part of its course, the artery runs obliquely
downwards and backwards deep to the tendons of the
abductor pollicis longus, the extensor pollicis brevis,
and superficial to the lateral ligament of the wrist joint.
Thus it passes through the anatomical snuffbox to reach
the proximal end of the first intermetacarpal space.
Deep Palmar Arch
Deep palmar arch is formed as the direct continuation
of the radial artery. It has a slight convexity towards the
fingers.
• Point 3: At proximal part of 1st dorsal intermeta-
carpal space (Fig. 11.3).
• Point 4: Just distal to hook of hamate (Fig. 11.3).
It is marked by a slightly convex line, 4 cm long, just
distal to the hook of the hamate bone (Fig. 11.3).
The deep palmar arch lies 1.2 cm proximal to the
superficial palmar arch across the metacarpals,
immediately distal to their bases. The deep branch of
ulnar nerve lies in its concavity (see Fig. 9.22).
Ulnar Artery
Ulnar artery is marked by joining the following three
points.
• Point 1: In front of the elbow at the level of the neck
of the radius medial to the tendon of the biceps
brachii (Fig. 11.3).
Fig. 11.3: Arteries and nerves of front of forearm and the deep
palmar arch
Fig. 11.4: Surface projection of axillary, radial, posterior
interosseous nerves and radial artery in anatomical snuffbox
(posterior view of left limb)
--- Page 205 ---
UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
• Point 5: At the junction of the upper one-third and
lower two-thirds of the medial border of the forearm
(lateral to the ulnar nerve) (Fig. 11.3).
• Point 6: Lateral to the pisiform bone (Fig. 11.3).
Thus the course of the ulnar artery is oblique in its
upper one-third, and vertical in its lower two-thirds.
The ulnar nerve lies just medial to the ulnar artery in
the lower two-thirds of its course. The ulnar artery
continues in the palm as the superficial palmar arch.
Superficial Palmar Arch
Superficial palmar arch is formed by the direct
continuation of the ulnar artery, and is marked as a
curved line by joining the following points:
• Point 1: Just lateral and distal to the pisiform bone
(Fig. 11.5).
• Point 2: Medial to the hook of the hamate bone (Fig. 11.5).
• Point 3: On the distal border of the thenar eminence
in line with the cleft between the index and middle
fingers (see Figs 9.32 and 11.5).
The convexity of the arch is directed towards the
fingers, and its most distal point is situated at the level
of the distal border of the fully extended thumb.
NERVES
Axillary Nerve with its Divisions
Axillary nerve is marked as a horizontal line on the
deltoid muscle, 2 cm above the midpoint between the
tip of the acromion process and the insertion of the
deltoid (Fig. 11.4).
Intramuscular injections in the deltoid are given
below the middle part of the muscle to avoid injury to
the axillary nerve and its accompanying vessels.
Musculocutaneous Nerve
Musculocutaneous nerve is marked by joining the
following two points.
• Point 1: Just lateral to the axillary artery 3 cm
proximal to its termination (Fig. 11.1).
• Point 2: Lateral to the tendon of the biceps brachii
muscle 2 cm above the bend of the elbow. Here it
pierces the deep fascia and continues as the lateral
cutaneous nerve of the forearm (see Fig. A1.1).
Median Nerve
In the Arm
Mark the brachial artery. The nerve is then marked
lateral to the artery in the upper half, and medial to
the artery in the lower half of the arm. The nerve
crosses the artery anteriorly in the middle of the arm
(Fig. 11.2).
In the Forearm
Median nerve is marked by joining the following two
points.
• Point 1: Medial to the brachial artery at the bend of
the elbow (Fig. 11.3).
• Point 2: In front of the wrist, over the tendon of the
palmaris longus or 1 cm medial to the tendon of the
flexor carpi radialis (Fig. 11.3).
In the Hand
Median nerve enters the palm by passing deep to flexor
retinaculum, immediately below which it divides
into lateral and medial branches. Lateral branch
supplies the three muscles of thenar eminence and gives
two branches to the thumb, and one to lateral side of
index finger. Medial branch gives branches for the
adjacent sides of index, middle and ring fingers. The
lateral 3½ nail beds are also supplied (Figs 11.5 and
11.6).
Radial Nerve
In the Arm
Radial nerve is marked by joining the following points.
• Point 1: At the lateral wall of the axilla at its lower
limit (Figs 11.1 and 11.4).
• Point 2: At the junction of the upper one-third and
lower two-thirds of a line joining the lateral epicondyle
with the insertion of the deltoid (Fig. 11.4).
• Point 3: On the front of the elbow just below the level
of the lateral epicondyle 1 cm lateral to the tendon
of the biceps brachii (Fig. 11.4).
The first and second points are joined across the back
of the arm to mark the oblique course of the radial nerve
in the radial (spiral) groove (posterior compartment).
The second and third points are joined on the front of
the arm to mark the vertical course of the nerve in the
anterior compartment.
In the Forearm
Superficial branch of radial nerve is marked by joining
the following three points.
• Point 1: 1 cm lateral to the biceps tendon just below
the level of the lateral epicondyle (Fig. 11.3).
• Point 2: At the junction of the upper two-thirds and
lower one-third of the lateral border of the forearm
just lateral to the radial artery (Fig. 11.3).
• Point 4: At the anatomical snuffbox (Fig. 11.4).
The nerve is vertical in its course between points one
and two. At the second point, it inclines backwards to
reach the snuffbox.
The nerve is closely related to the lateral side of the
radial artery only in the middle one-third of the
forearm.
--- Page 206 ---
SURFACE MARKING, RADIOLOGICAL ANATOMY AND COMPARISON OF UPPER AND LOWER LIMBS
Upper Limb
Section 1
Posterior Interosseous Nerve/
Deep Branch of Radial Nerve
It is marked by joining the following three points.
• Point 3: 1 cm lateral to the biceps brachii tendon just
below the level of the lateral epicondyle (Fig. 11.4).
• Point 5: At the junction of the upper one-third and
lower two-thirds of a line joining the middle of the
posterior aspect of the head of the radius to the dorsal
tubercle at the lower end of the radius or Lister’s
tubercle (Fig. 11.4).
• Point 6: On the back of the wrist 1 cm medial to the
dorsal tubercle (Fig. 11.4).
Posterior interosseous nerve supplies the muscles of
posterior aspect of the forearm.
Ulnar Nerve
In the Arm
Ulnar nerve is marked by joining the following points.
Fig. 11.5: Branches of median nerve and ulnar nerve in the palm. Superficial palmar arch is also shown
Fig. 11.6: Cutaneous nerve supply of palm and dorsum of
hand
--- Page 207 ---
UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
• Point 1: On the lateral wall of the axilla at its lower
limit (lower border of the teres major muscle)
(Fig. 11.7).
• Point 2: At the middle of the medial border of the
arm.
• Point 3: Behind the base of the medial epicondyle of
the humerus.
In the Forearm
Ulnar nerve is marked by joining the following two
points.
• Point 3: On the back of the base of the medial
epicondyle of the humerus (Fig. 11.7).
• Point 4: Lateral to the pisiform bone.
In the lower two-thirds of the forearm, the ulnar
nerve lies medial to the ulnar artery (Fig. 11.3).
In the Hand
Ulnar nerve lies superficial to the medial part of
flexor retinaculum and medial to ulnar vessels where
it divides into superficial and deep branches. The
superficial branch supplies medial 1½ digits
including their nail beds (Fig. 11.7). The deep branch
passes backwards between pisiform and hook of
hamate to lie in the concavity of the deep palmar arch
(Fig. 11.3).
JOINTS
Shoulder Joint
The anterior margin of the glenoid cavity corresponds
to the lower half of the shoulder joint. It is marked by a
line 3 cm long drawn downwards from a point just
lateral to the tip of the coracoid process. The line is
slightly concave laterally.
Elbow Joint
The joint line is situated 2 cm below the line joining the
two epicondyles, and slopes downwards and medially.
This slope is responsible for the carrying angle.
Wrist Joint
The joint line is concave downwards, and is marked
by joining the styloid processes of the radius and
ulna.
RETINACULA
Flexor Retinaculum
Flexor retinaculum is marked by joining the following
four points.
i. Pisiform bone
ii. Tubercle of the scaphoid bone
iii. Hook of the hamate bone (Fig. 11.8)
iv. Crest of the trapezium.
Fig. 11.8: Flexor retinaculum
Fig. 11.7: Course of ulnar nerve
--- Page 208 ---
SURFACE MARKING, RADIOLOGICAL ANATOMY AND COMPARISON OF UPPER AND LOWER LIMBS
Upper Limb
Section 1
The upper border is obtained by joining the first and
second points, and the lower border by joining the third
and fourth points. The upper border is concave
upwards, and the lower border is concave downwards
(see Figs 9.15 and 9.16).
Extensor Retinaculum
Extensor retinaculum is an oblique band directed down-
wards and medially, and is about 2 cm broad (vertically).
Laterally, it is attached to the lower salient part of the
anterior border of the radius, and medially to the medial
side of the carpus (pisiform and triquetral bones) and to
the styloid process of the ulna (see Fig. 9.52).
SYNOVIAL SHEATHS OF THE FLEXOR TENDONS
Common Flexor Synovial Sheath (Ulnar Bursa)
Above the flexor retinaculum (or lower transverse
crease of the wrist), it extends into the forearm for
about 2.5 cm. Here its medial border corresponds to
the lateral edge of the tendon of the flexor carpi
ulnaris, and its lateral border corresponds roughly to
the tendon of the palmaris longus.
Ulnar bursa becomes narrower behind the flexor
retinaculum, and broadens out below it.
Most of it terminates at the level of the upper trans-
verse creases of the palm, but the medial part is continued
up to the distal transverse crease of the little finger.
Synovial Sheaths for the Tendon
of Flexor Pollicis Longus (Radial Bursa)
Radial bursa is a narrow tube which is coextensive with
the ulnar bursa in the forearm and wrist. Below the
flexor retinaculum, it is continued into the thumb up
to its distal crease (see Fig. 9.7).
Digital Synovial Sheaths
The synovial sheaths of the flexor tendons of the index,
middle and ring fingers extend from the necks of the
metacarpal bones (corresponding roughly to the lower
transverse crease of the palm) to the bases of the
terminal phalanges (see Fig. 9.7).
Competency achievement: The student should be able to:
AN 13.5 Identify the bones and joints of upper limb seen in
anteroposterior and lateral view radiographs of shoulder region,
arm, elbow, forearm and hand.2
RADIOLOGICAL ANATOMY OF UPPER LIMB
General Remarks
In the case of the limbs, plain radiography is mainly
required. For complete information, it is always
advisable to have anteroposterior (AP) as well as lateral
views; and as far as possible radiographs of the opposite
limb should be available for comparison. The skeleton,
owing to its high radiopacity, forms the most striking
feature in plain skiagrams. In general, the following
information can be obtained from plain skiagrams of the
limbs.
1 Fractures are seen as breaks in the surface continuity
of the bone. A fracture line is usually irregular and
asymmetrical. An epiphyseal line of an incompletely
ossified bone, seen as a gap, should not be mistaken
for a fracture: It has regular margins, and is bilaterally
symmetrical. Supernumerary or accessory bones are
also symmetrical.
2 Dislocations are seen as deranged or distorted
relations between the articular bony surfaces forming
a joint.
3 Below the age of 25 years, the age of a person can be
determined from the knowledge of ossification of the
bones.
4 Certain deficiency diseases like rickets and scurvy can
be diagnosed.
5 Infections (osteomyelitis) and growths (osteoma,
osteoclastoma, osteosarcoma, etc.) can be diagnosed.
A localised rarefaction of a bone may indicate an
infection.
6 Congenital absence or fusion of bones can be seen.
Reading Plain Skiagrams of Limbs
1 Identify the view of the picture, anteroposterior or
lateral. Each view shows a specific shape and
arrangement of the bones.
2 Identify all the bones and their different parts visible
in the given radiogram. Normal overlapping and
‘end-on’ appearances of bones in different views
should be carefully studied.
3 Study the normal relations of the bones forming
joints. The articular cartilage is radiolucent
and does not cast any shadow. The radiological ‘joint
space’ indicates the size of the articular cartilages.
Normally, the joint space is about 2–5 mm in adults.
4 Study the various epiphyses visible in young bones
and try to determine the age of the person concerned.
Shoulder
A.The following are seen in an AP view of the shoulder
(Figs 11.9a and b).
1 The upper end of the humerus, including the head,
greater and lesser tubercles and intertubercular
sulcus.
2 The scapula, including the glenoid cavity, coracoid
(seen end-on), acromion process, its lateral, medial
and superior borders, and the superior and
inferior angles. The suprascapular notch may be
seen.
3 The clavicle, except for its medial end.
4 Upper part of the thoracic cage, including the
upper ribs.
--- Page 209 ---
UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
B. Study the normal appearance of the following joints.
1 Shoulder joint: The glenoid cavity articulates only
with the lower half of the head of the humerus
(when the arm is in the anatomical position). The
upper part of the head lies beneath the acromion
process. The greater tuberosity forms the lateral
most bony point in the shoulder region.
2 Acromioclavicular joint.
C. Note the epiphyses, if any, and determine the age
with the help of ossifications described with
individual bones.
Elbow
A.Identify the following bones in an AP and lateral
views of the elbow (Figs 11.10a and b).
1 The lower end of humerus, including the medial
and lateral epicondyles, the medial and lateral
supracondylar ridges, trochlea, the capitulum and
the olecranon fossa.
2 The upper end of the ulna, including the olecranon
and coronoid processes.
3 The upper end of the radius including its head,
neck and tuberosity.
Figs 11.9a and b: (a) Anteroposterior view of the shoulder joint, and (b) diagrammatic depiction of (a)
Figs 11.10a and b: (a) Anteroposterior view of the elbow joint, and (b) diagrammatic depiction of (a)
--- Page 210 ---
SURFACE MARKING, RADIOLOGICAL ANATOMY AND COMPARISON OF UPPER AND LOWER LIMBS
Upper Limb
Section 1
Figs 11.12a and b: (a) Anteroposterior view of the hand, and (b) diagrammatic depiction of (a)
B. Study the normal appearance of the following joints
in AP view.
1 Elbow joint
2 Superior radioulnar joint
C. Note the olecranon and coronoid processes in a
lateral view of the elbow (Figs 11.11a and b).
D.Note the epiphyses (if any) and determine the age
with the help of ossifications described with
individual bones.
Hand
A.Identify the following bones in an AP skiagram
(Figs 11.12a and b).
1 The lower end of the radius with its styloid process.
2 The lower end of the ulna with its styloid process.
3 The eight carpal bones. Note the overlapping of the
triquetral and pisiform bones; and of the trapezium
with the trapezoid. Also identify the tubercle of the
scaphoid and the hook of the hamate.
Figs 11.11a and b: (a) Lateral view of the elbow joint, and (b) diagrammatic depiction of (a)
--- Page 211 ---
UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
COMPARISON OF UPPER AND LOWER LIMBS
Upper limb
General
The upper limb is for range and variety of
movements.
Thumb assisted by palm and fingers has the
power of holding articles.
Upper limb bud rotates laterally, so that the thumb
points laterally.
Nerve supply: Ventral rami of cervical 5–8 and
thoracic 1 segments of spinal cord. Musculo-
cutaneous, median and ulnar nerves supply the
flexor aspects of the limb, while the axillary nerve
supplies deltoid and radial nerve supplies the
triceps brachii (extensor of elbow) and its branch,
the posterior interosseous, supplies the extensors
of wrist.
Bones
Humerus is the longest bone of upper limb
Joints
Shoulder joint is a multiaxial joint
Muscles
Anteriorly: Biceps, brachialis and coraco-
brachialis supplied by musculocutaneous nerve
Posteriorly: Triceps brachii supplied by radial
nerve
Nerves
Musculocutaneous for anterior compartment of
arm. Radial for posterior compartment. Coraco-
brachialis equivalent to medial compartment of
arm also supplied by musculocutaneous nerve
(Fig. A1.1)
Branches
Muscular, cutaneous, articular/genicular, vascular
and terminal branches
Arteries
Axillary, brachial, profunda (deep) brachii
Forearm
Bones
Radius: Preaxial bone
Ulna: Postaxial bone
Joints
Elbow joint formed by humerus, radius and ulna,
communicates with superior radioulnar joint.
Forearm is characterised by superior and inferior
radioulnar joints. These are both pivot variety of
synovial joints permitting rotatory movements of
pronation and supination, e.g. meant for picking
up food and putting it in the mouth (Fig. 10.19)
Muscles
Palmaris longus (see Fig. 9.3a)
Flexor digitorum profundus
Flexor pollicis longus
Flexor digitorum superficialis
Flexor carpi ulnaris
Flexor carpi radialis
Abductor pollicis longus
Extensor digitorum
Extensor pollicis longus
General
Anterior aspect: Flexors of wrist and pronators
of forearm
Posterior aspect: Extensors of wrist, and supinator
Lower limb
Lower limb with long and heavy bones supports and stabilises
the body.
Lower limb bud rotates medially, so that big toe points medially.
Nerve supply: Ventral rami of lumbar 2–5 and sacral 1–3
segments of spinal cord. The two gluteal nerves supply glutei.
Sciatic and one of its terminal branches, the tibial nerve supplies
the flexor aspect of the limb. The other terminal branch of sciatic
nerve, i.e. common peroneal, supplies the extensors of ankle
joint (dorsiflexors) through its deep peroneal branch. Its
superficial branch supplies the peroneal muscles of the leg.
Femoral supplies the quadriceps femoris (extensor of knee)
while obturator nerve supplies the adductors.
Thigh
Femur is the longest bone of lower limb and of the body
Hip joint is a multiaxial joint
Posteriorly: Hamstrings supplied by sciatic nerve
Anteriorly: Quadriceps by femoral nerve
Medially: Adductors by obturator nerve
Sciatic nerve for posterior compartment of thigh, femoral nerve
for anterior compartment of thigh, obturator nerve for adductor
muscles of medial compartment of thigh
Muscular, cutaneous, articular/genicular, vascular and terminal
branches
Femoral, popliteal and profunda femoris (deep)
Tibia: Preaxial bone
Fibula: Postaxial bone
Knee joint formed by femur, tibia and patella. Fibula does not
participate in knee joint. An additional bone (sesamoid) patella
makes its appearance. This is an important weight-bearing
joint
Plantaris
Flexor digitorum longus
Flexor hallucis longus
Soleus and flexor digitorum brevis
Gastrocnemius (medial head)
Gastrocnemius (lateral head)
Tibialis anterior
Extensor digitorum longus
Extensor hallucis longus
Anterior aspect: Dorsiflexors of ankle joint
Posterior aspect: Plantar flexors (flexors) of ankle joint
Lateral aspect: Evertors of subtalar joint
(Contd.)
--- Page 212 ---
SURFACE MARKING, RADIOLOGICAL ANATOMY AND COMPARISON OF UPPER AND LOWER LIMBS
Upper Limb
Section 1
Lower limb
Tibial nerve for all the plantar flexors of the ankle joint. Common
peroneal winds around neck of fibula (postaxial bone) and
divides into superficial and deep branches. The deep peroneal
supplies dorsiflexors (extensors) of the ankle joint. The
superficial peroneal nerve supplies a separate lateral
compartment of leg
Popliteal divides into anterior tibial and posterior tibial in the
popliteal fossa. Posterior tibial corresponds to ulnar artery
Foot
Seven big tarsal bones occupying almost half of the foot. There
are special joints between talus, calcaneus and navicular, i.e.
subtalar and talocalcaneonavicular joints. They permit the
movements of inversion and eversion (raising the medial
border/lateral border of the foot) for walking on the uneven
surfaces. This movement of inversion is similar to supination
and of eversion to pronation of forearm. Flexor digitorum
accessorius is a distinct muscle to straighten the action of flexor
digitorum longus tendons in line with the toes on which these
act. Tibialis anterior, tibialis posterior and peroneus longus
reach the foot and sole for the movements of inversion (first
two) and eversion (last one), respectively
Medial plantar supplies four muscles of the sole including 1st
lumbrical (abductor hallucis, flexor hallucis brevis, flexor
digitorum brevis, 1st lumbrical)
Lateral plantar corresponds to ulnar nerve and supplies 14
intrinsic muscles of the sole
Muscles which enter the sole from the leg, e.g. flexor digitorum
longus, flexor hallucis longus, tibialis posterior, peroneus
longus, are supplied by the nerves of the leg. 1st lumbrical is
unipennate and is supplied by medial plantar, 2nd–4th are
bipennate being supplied by deep branch of lateral plantar
nerve. Extensor digitorum brevis present on dorsum of foot
Posterior tibial artery divides into medial plantar and lateral
plantar branches. There is only one arch, the plantar arch
formed by lateral plantar and dorsalis pedis (continuation of
anterior tibial) arteries
The great saphenous vein with perforators lies along the
preaxial border. The short saphenous vein lies along the
postaxial border but it terminates in the popliteal fossa
Upper limb
Forearm
Nerves
Median nerve for 6½ muscles and ulnar nerve
for 1½ muscles of anterior aspect of forearm.
These are flexors of wrist and pronators of
forearm. Posterior interosseous nerve or deep
branch of radial supplies the extensors of the wrist
and the supinator muscle of forearm. It winds
around radius (preaxial bone) and corresponds
to deep peroneal nerve. The superficial branch
of radial nerve corresponds to the superficial
peroneal nerve
Arteries
Brachial divides into radial and ulnar branches
in the cubital fossa. Radial corresponds to
anterior tibial artery
Hand
Bones
There are eight small carpal bones occupying very
small area of the hand. First carpometacarpal
joints
joint, i.e. joint between trapezium and base of 1st
metacarpal is a unique joint. It is of saddle variety
and permits a versatile movement of opposition
in addition to other movements. This permits the
hand to hold things, e.g. doll, pencil, food, bat,
etc. Opponens pollicis is specially for opposition
Nerves
Median nerve supplies 5 muscles of hand
including 1st and 2nd lumbricals (abductor pollicis
brevis, flexor pollicis brevis, opponens pollicis,
1st and 2nd lumbricals) (see Fig. 9.37)
Ulnar nerve corresponds to lateral plantar nerve
and supplies 15 intrinsic muscles of the hand
(see Fig. 9.34)
Muscles
Muscles which enter the palm from forearm, e.g.
flexor digitorum superficialis, flexor digitorum
profundus, flexor pollicis longus are supplied by
the nerves of the forearm. 1st and 2nd lumbricals
are unipennate and are supplied by median
nerve. 3rd and 4th are bipennate being supplied
by deep branch of ulnar nerve. No muscle on
dorsum of hand
Blood
Radial artery corresponds to anterior tibial while
vessels
ulnar artery corresponds to posterior tibial artery.
Ulnar artery divides into superficial and deep
branches. There are two palmar arches—
superficial and deep. The superficial arch mainly
is formed by ulnar artery and deep arch is formed
mainly by the radial artery. Cephalic vein is along
the preaxial border. Basilic vein runs along the
postaxial border of the limb and terminates in the
middle of the arm
--- Page 213 ---
UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
Lower limb
Foot
The axis of movement of adduction and abduction passes
through the 2nd digit. So 2nd toe possesses two dorsal
interossei muscles
Sole
Abductor hallucis brevis
Flexor digitorum brevis
Abductor digiti minimi
No such arch
Branches of medial plantar nerve and artery
Branches of superficial branch of lateral plantar nerve
Tendon of flexor digitorum longus, lumbricals and flexor
digitorum accessorius
Tendon of flexor hallucis longus
Flexor hallucis brevis
Adductor hallucis
Flexor digiti minimi brevis
Plantar arch with deep branch of lateral plantar nerve
1–3 plantar interossei
1–4 dorsal interossei
Tendons of tibialis posterior and peroneus longus
Upper limb
Hand
Axis
The axis of movement of adduction and abduction
is through the third digit or middle finger. So the
middle finger has two dorsal interossei muscles
Palm
Abductor pollicis brevis (see Fig. 9.20)
Flexor pollicis brevis
Flexor digiti minimi
Abductor digiti minimi
Superficial palmar arch
Branches of median nerve
Branches of superficial branch of ulnar nerve
Tendons of flexor digitorum superficialis
Tendons of flexor digitorum profundus and
lumbricals (see Fig. 9.21)
Tendon of flexor pollicis longus
Opponens pollicis (see Fig. 9.22)
Adductor pollicis
Opponens digiti minimi
Deep palmar arch and deep branch of ulnar nerve
1–4 palmar interossei (see Fig. 9.23)
1–4 dorsal interossei
1. Trace the beginning and course of radial and ulnar
arteries in the forearm.
2. Trace the beginning, course of radial, median and
ulnar nerves in the forearm.
3. Write short notes on:
a. Anatomical snuffbox
b. Synovial sheaths of the flexor tendons
c. Surface marking of flexor retinaculum of wrist
d. Surface marking and attachments of extensor
retinaculum
4 The five metacarpal bones
5 The fourteen phalanges
6 The sesamoid bones present in relation to the
thumb, and occasionally in relation to the other
fingers
B. Study the normal appearance of these joints.
1 The wrist joint
2 The inferior radioulnar joint
3 The intercarpal, carpometacarpal, metacarpo-
phalangeal and interphalangeal joints
C. Note the following bones in a lateral skiagram.
1 Lunate
2 Scaphoid
3 Capitate
4 Trapezium
D.Note the epiphyses and other incomplete
ossifications, and determine the age with the help of
ossifications described with individual bones.
FURTHER READING
• Hale SJ, Mirjalili SA, Stringer MD. Inconsistencies in surface
anatomy: the need for an evidence-based reappraisal. Clin
Anat 2010;23:922–30.
An argument that an evidence-based framework is essential, if
surface anatomy is to be accurate and clinically relevant.
1–2 From Medical Council of India, Competency based Undergraduate Curriculum for the Indian Medical Graduate, 2018;1:44–80.
--- Page 214 ---
INTRODUCTION
The nerves are very important and precious component
of our body. This appendix deals with the main nerves
of the upper limb. Most of the nerves course through
different regions of the upper limb and have been
described in parts in the respective regions. In this
appendix, the course of the entire nerve from origin to
its termination including the branches and clinical
aspects has been described briefly (Fig. A1.1a). Arteries
of upper limb have been tabulated in Table A1.5.
Important clinical terms related to upper limb have
been defined and multiple choice questions are given.
MUSCULOCUTANEOUS NERVE
Musculocutaneous nerve is so named as it supplies
muscles of front of arm and skin of lateral side of
forearm.
Root Value
Ventral rami of C5–C7 segments of spinal cord.
Course
Axilla and Arm
Musculocutaneous nerve is a branch of the lateral cord
of brachial plexus, lies lateral to axillary and upper part
of brachial artery. It supplies coracobrachialis, pierces
the muscle to lie in the intermuscular septum between
biceps brachii and brachialis muscles, both of which
are supplied by this nerve (see Fig. 8.6 and A1.1).
Forearm
About 2.5 cm above the crease of elbow, it becomes
cutaneous by piercing the deep fascia. The nerve is
called the lateral cutaneous nerve of forearm which
supplies skin of lateral side of forearm both on the front
and back.
The only equipment lacking in the modern hospital; somebody to meet you at the entrance with a handshake
—Martin H Fischer
Branches
Muscular
Coracobrachialis, long head of
biceps brachii, short head of biceps
brachii, and brachialis (Fig. A1.1).
Cutaneous
Lateral side of forearm (both on
the front and the back).
Articular
Elbow joint.
This nerve rarely gets injured.
AXILLARY OR CIRCUMFLEX NERVE
Axillary nerve is called axillary as it runs through the
upper part of axilla though it does not supply any
structure there. It is called circumflex as it courses around
the surgical neck of humerus (see Fig. 6.6) to supply the
prominent deltoid muscle.
Root Value
Ventral rami of C5, C6 segments of spinal cord.
Course
Axilla
Axillary or circumflex nerve is the smaller terminal
branch of posterior cord seen in the axilla (see Fig. 4.14).
Quadrangular Space
The nerve passes backwards through the quadrangular
space (bounded by subscapularis above, teres major
below, long head of triceps brachii medially and
surgical neck of humerus laterally) (see Fig. 6.11). Here
it lies below the capsule of the shoulder joint.
Surgical Neck of Humerus
Then it passes behind the surgical neck of humerus
where it divides into anterior and posterior divisions
(Fig. A1.1).
Nerves, Arteries and
Clinical Terms
--- Page 215 ---
UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
Table A1.1: Branches of axillary nerve
Trunk
Anterior division
Posterior division
Muscular
Deltoid (most part)
Deltoid (posterior part) and teres minor. The nerve to teres
minor is characterised by the presence of a pseudoganglion
Cutaneous
Upper lateral cutaneous nerve of arm
Articular and vascular
Shoulder joint
To posterior circumflex humeral artery
Branches
The branches of axillary nerve are presented in
Table A1.1.
RADIAL NERVE
Radial nerve is the thickest branch of brachial plexus.
Root Value
Ventral rami of C5–C8, T1 segments of spinal cord
(see Fig. 4.14).
Course
Axilla
Radial nerve lies against the muscles forming the
posterior wall of axilla, i.e. subscapularis, teres major and
Fig. A1.1: Brachial plexus and muscular branches of the main nerves
--- Page 216 ---
NERVES, ARTERIES AND CLINICAL TERMS
Upper Limb
Section 1
latissimus dorsi. It then lies for a short distance in arm
behind brachial artery. Then it enters in the lower
triangular space between teres major, long head of triceps
brachii and shaft of humerus. It gives two muscular and
one cutaneous branches in the axilla (Fig. A1.1).
Radial Sulcus
Radial nerve enters through the lower triangular space
into the radial sulcus, where it lies between the lateral
and medial heads of triceps brachii along with profunda
brachii vessels (see Fig. 6.11). Long and lateral heads form
the roof of the radial sulcus. It leaves the sulcus by
piercing the lateral intermuscular septum. In the sulcus,
it gives three muscular and two cutaneous branches.
Front of Arm
The radial nerve descends on the lower and lateral side
of front of arm deep in the interval between brachialis
on medial side and brachioradialis with extensor carpi
radialis longus on the lateral side to reach capitulum
of humerus (see Fig. 8.17).
Cubital Fossa
The nerve enters the lateral side of cubital fossa. There
the radial nerve terminates by dividing into superficial
and deep branches.
The deep branch supplies extensor carpi radialis
brevis and supinator. Then it courses between two heads
of supinator to reach back of forearm.
Front of Forearm
The superficial branch leaves the cubital fossa to enter
lateral side of front of forearm, accompanied by the
radial vessels in its upper two-thirds (see Fig. 9.10). At
the junction of upper two-thirds and lower one-third,
the superficial branch turns laterally to reach the
posterolateral aspect of forearm.
Wrist and Dorsum of Hand
The superficial branch descends till the anatomical
snuffbox to reach dorsum of hand, where it supplies
skin of lateral half of dorsum of hand and lateral
2½ digits till distal interphalangeal joints (see Figs 7.1b
and 9.52a).
Back of Forearm and Wrist
The deep branch of radial nerve enters the back of
forearm, where it supplies the muscles mentioned in
Table A1.2b. Lower down it passes through the 4th
compartment under the extensor retinaculum to reach
the back of wrist where it ends in a pseudoganglion,
branches of which supply the neighbouring joints
(see Fig. 9.56).
Branches of Radial Nerve
The branches of radial nerve are presented in
Table A1.2a.
Branches of deep division of radial nerve are shown
in Table A1.2b.
Table A1.2a: Branches of radial nerve
Axilla
Radial sulcus
Lateral side of arm
Muscular
Long head of triceps brachii
Lateral head of triceps brachii
Brachioradialis
Medial head of triceps brachii
Medial head of triceps brachii
Extensor carpi radialis longus
Anconeus
Lateral part of brachialis (proprioceptive)
Cutaneous
Posterior cutaneous nerve
Posterior cutaneous nerve of forearm
of arm
Lower lateral cutaneous nerve of arm
Vascular
To profunda brachii artery
Terminal
Superficial and deep or posterior
interosseous branches
Table A1.2b: Branches of deep division of radial nerve
Cubital fossa
Back of forearm
Wrist
Muscular
Extensor carpi radialis brevis
Abductor pollicis longus,
and supinator
extensor pollicis brevis,
extensor pollicis longus,
extensor digitorum, extensor
indicis, extensor digiti minimi
and extensor carpi ulnaris
Articular
To inferior radioulnar,
wrist and intercarpal
joints
--- Page 217 ---
UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
Branches of superficial division of radial nerve are
shown in Table A1.2c.
MEDIAN NERVE
Median nerve is called median as it runs in the median
plane of the forearm.
Root Value
Ventral rami of C5–C8, T1 segments of spinal cord.
Course
Axilla
Median nerve is formed by two roots, lateral root from
lateral cord (C5, 6, 7) and medial root from medial cord
(C8, T1) of brachial plexus. Medial root crosses the
axillary artery to join the lateral root. The median nerve
runs on the lateral side of axillary artery (see Fig. 8.9).
Median nerve continues to run on the lateral side of
brachial artery till the middle of arm, where it crosses
in front of the artery, passes anterior to elbow joint into
the cubital fossa (see Figs 8.9 and 8.17 and A1.1).
Cubital Fossa
Median nerve lies most medial in the cubital fossa. It
gives three branches to flexor muscles of the forearm.
It leaves the fossa by passing between two heads of
pronator teres (see Figs 8.18 and 8.19).
Forearm
Median nerve enters the forearm and lies in the centre
of forearm. It lies deep to fibrous arch of flexor digitorum
superficialis on the flexor digitorum profundus. Adheres
to deep surface of flexor digitorum superficialis, leaves
the muscle, along its lateral border. Lastly, it is placed
deep and lateral to palmaris longus.
Flexor Retinaculum
Median nerve lies deep to flexor retinaculum to enter
palm (see Fig. 9.10).
Palm
Median nerve lies medial to the muscles of thenar
eminence, which it supplies. It also gives cutaneous
branches to lateral 3½ digits and their nail beds
including skin of distal phalanges on their dorsal aspect
(see Figs 7.1, 9.12 and 9.41).
Branches of Median Nerve
The branches of median nerve are presented in
Table A1.3.
ULNAR NERVE
Ulnar nerve is named so as it runs along the medial or
ulnar side of the upper limb.
Root Value
Ventral rami of C8 and T1. It also gets fibres of C7 from
the lateral root of median nerve (see Fig. 4.14).
Course
Axilla
Ulnar nerve lies in the axilla between the axillary vein
and axillary artery on a deeper plane.
Ulnar nerve lies medial to brachial artery. Runs
downwards with the brachial artery in its proximal part
(see Fig. 8.9). At the middle of arm, it pierces the medial
intermuscular septum to lie on its back and descends on
the back of medial epicondyle of humerus where it can
be palpated. Palpation causes tingling sensations (see
Fig. 8.13a). That is why humerus is called ‘funny bone’.
Forearm
Ulnar nerve enters the forearm by passing between two
heads of flexor carpi ulnaris. There it lies on medial
part of flexor digitorum profundus.
Ulnar nerve is not a content of cubital fossa.
It is accompanied by the ulnar artery in lower two-
thirds of forearm (see Fig. 9.10).
It gives two muscular and two cutaneous branches
(Table A1.4 and Fig. A1.1).
Flexor Retinaculum
Finally, it lies on the medial part of flexor retinaculum
to enter palm. At the distal border of retinaculum, the
nerve divides into its superficial and deep branches
(see Figs 9.13 and 9.15).
Table A1.2c: Branches of superficial division of radial nerve
Forearm
Anatomical snuffbox and dorsum of hand
Cutaneous and vascular
Lateral side of forearm
Skin over anatomical snuffbox, lateral half of
and radial vessels
dorsum of hand and lateral 2½ digits till their distal
interphalangeal joints
Articular
To wrist joint, 1st carpometacarpal joint,
metacarpophalangeal and interphalangeal joints of
the thumb, index and middle fingers
--- Page 218 ---
NERVES, ARTERIES AND CLINICAL TERMS
Upper Limb
Section 1
Table A1.4: Branches of ulnar nerve
Forearm
Hand (see Fig. 9.13)
Muscular
Medial half of flexor digitorum profundus,
Superficial branch—palmaris brevis.
flexor carpi ulnaris
Deep branch—muscles of hypothenar
eminence, medial two lumbricals, 4–1 dorsal
interossei and 4–1 palmar interossei and
adductor pollicis. May supply deep head of
flexor pollicis brevis
Cutaneous/digital
Dorsal cutaneous branch for medial half of dorsum of
hand. Palmar cutaneous branch for medial one-third of
palm. Digital branches to medial 1½ fingers,
nail beds and dorsal aspects of distal phalanges
Vascular/articular
Also supplies digital vessels and joints of medial side of hand
Palm
Superficial branch supplies palmaris brevis and gives
digital branches to medial 1½ digits including medial
1½ nail beds till the distal interphalangeal joints
(Fig. A1.2).
Deep branch supplies most of the intrinsic muscles of
the hand. At first, it supplies three muscles of hypothenar
eminence. Running in the concavity of deep palmar arch,
it gives branches to 4th and 3rd lumbricals from deep
aspect; 4,3,2,1 dorsal interossei and 4,3,2,1 palmar
interossei to end in adductor pollicis (Table A1.5).
Since it supplies intrinsic muscles of hand responsible
for finer movements, this nerve is called ‘musician’s
nerve’ (see Figs 9.34a and b).
Branches
The branches of ulnar nerve are presented in Table A1.4
and Fig. A1.1.
Table A1.3: Branches of median nerve
Axilla and arm
Cubital fossa
Forearm
Palm
Muscular
Pronator teres in
Flexor carpi radialis,
Anterior interosseous which
Recurrent branch for abductor
lower part of arm
flexor digitorum
supplies: Lateral half of flexor pollicis brevis, flexor pollicis
superficialis, palmaris
digitorum profundus, pronator brevis, opponens pollicis. 1st
longus
quadratus, and flexor
and 2nd lumbricals (see Fig. 9.12)
pollicis longus
from the digital nerves
Cutaneous
Palmar cutaneous branch
• Two digital branches to lateral
for lateral two-thirds of palm
and medial sides of thumb
• One to lateral side of index finger
• Two to adjacent sides of index
and middle fingers
• Two to adjacent sides of middle
and ring fingers. These branches
also supply dorsal aspects of
distal phalanges of lateral 3½
digits including nail beds
Articular and
Gives sympathetic
Elbow joint
Gives sympathetic fibres to
Gives articular branches to joints
vascular
fibres to axillary
radial and ulnar arteries
of hand
and brachial
arteries
Fig. A1.2: Sensory loss in median, ulnar and radial nerves
paralyses
--- Page 219 ---
UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
Table A1.5: Comparison of injury of median and ulnar nerves at wrist
Injury to median nerve at wrist
Injury to ulnar nerve at wrist
Loss of thenar eminence
Loss of hypothenar eminence
Normal fist making by 4th, 5th digits
Clawing of 4th and 5th digits
Lagging behing of 2nd and 3rd digits in fist making
Slight clawing of 2nd and 3rd digits
Gutters seen in palm
Sensory loss over lateral 3½ digits
Sensory loss over medial 1½ digits
Loss of pronation of forearm
Loss of adduction of 2nd, 4th and 5th digits
Loss of opposition of thumb
Loss of abduction of 2nd–4th digits
CLINICAL ANATOMY
Musculocutaneous nerve injury
1 and 2: Paralysis of biceps and brachialis
3. Sensory loss on lateral side of forearm
Axillary nerve injury
Loss of abduction from beginning to 90°
Sensory loss over lower half of deltoid—regimental/badge sign.
Radial nerve injury
1. No extension of elbow
2. Wrist drop
3. Sensory loss (Fig. A1.2)
--- Page 220 ---
NERVES, ARTERIES AND CLINICAL TERMS
Upper Limb
Section 1
Median nerve injury
1. Weak flexion of wrist
2. Loss of pronation of forearm
3. Loss of flexion of proximal interphalangeal and distal
interphalangeal joints of index and middle fingers
4. Loss of flexion at interphalangeal joint of thumb
5. Loss of thenar eminence
6. Sensory, trophic and vasomotor changes (see Figs 9.40 to 9.44 and A1.2)
Ulnar nerve injury
Flattening of medial border of forearm
Loss of flexion at distal interphalangeal joints of 4th and 5th
digits
Loss of hypothenar eminence
Loss of adduction of thumb
Loss of abduction of all fingers except little finger
Loss of adduction of 2nd, 4th and 5th digits
Slight clawing of 2nd and 3rd digits
Marked clawing of 4th and 5th digits
Sensory, trophic and vasomotor changes (Fig. A1.2)
• If ulnar nerve is injured at the elbow, the clawing of the fingers is less, because medial half of flexor digitorum
profundus (flexor of proximal and distal interphalangeal joints) also gets paralysed. If ulnar nerve is injured
at wrist, the clawing of the fingers is more as intact flexor digitorum profundus flexes the digits more. Thus
if lesion is proximal (near elbow), clawing is less. On the contrary, if lesion is distal (near wrist), clawing is
more. This is called ‘action of paradox’/ulnar paradox.
• If both ulnar and median nerves get paralysed, there is complete claw hand (see Fig. 9.45).
Table A1.5 shows the comparison between injuries of median and ulnar nerves at the wrist. Table A1.6
gives the arteries of upper limb with their branches and area of distribution.
--- Page 221 ---
UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
Table A1.6: Arteries of upper limb
Artery
Origin, course and termination
Area of distribution
AXILLARY ARTERY
Starts at the outer border of first rib as continuation
Supplies all walls of axilla, pectoral
(see Fig. 4.6 and
of subclavian artery, runs through axilla and
region including mammary gland
Fig. A1.3)
continues as brachial artery at the lower border of
teres major muscle
Superior thoracic artery
From 1st part of axillary artery
Supplies upper part of thoracic wall and
(see Fig. 4.10)
the pectoral muscles
Thoracoacromial artery
From 2nd part of axillary artery, pierces clavipectoral
Supplies pectoral and deltoid muscles
fascia and divides into deltoid, acromial and clavi-
cular and pectoral branches
Lateral thoracic artery
From 2nd part of axillary artery runs along
Supplies the muscles of thoracic wall
inferolateral border of pectoralis minor
including the mammary gland
Anterior circumflex
From third part of axillary artery runs on the anterior
Supplies the neighbouring shoulder joint
humeral artery
aspect of intertubercular sulcus and anastomoses
and the muscles
with large posterior circumflex humeral artery
Posterior circumflex
From third part of axillary artery lies along the
Supplies huge deltoid muscle, skin
humeral artery
surgical neck of humerus with axillary nerve
overlying it and the shoulder joint
Subscapular artery
Largest branch of axillary artery runs along the
Supplies muscles of posterior wall of axilla,
(see Figs 4.10 and 6.12)
muscles of posterior wall of axilla
i.e. teres major, latissimus dorsi, sub-
scapularis. Takes part in anastomoses
around scapula
BRACHIAL ARTERY
Starts at the lower border of teres major as continu-
Supplies muscles of the arm, humerus
(see Fig. 8.9)
ation of axillary artery. Runs on anterior aspect of
bone and skin of whole of arm. Takes
arm and ends by dividing into radial and ulnar
part in anastomoses around elbow joint
arteries at neck of radius in the cubital fossa
Profunda brachii artery
Largest branch of brachial artery. Runs with radial
Supplies muscles of back of arm and its
(see Fig. 8.10)
nerve in the radial sulcus of humerus. Reaching the
branches anastomose with branches of
lateral side of arm, ends by dividing into anterior and
radial artery and ulnar artery on lateral
posterior branches
epicondyle of humerus
Superior ulnar collateral
Branch of brachial artery. Accompanies ulnar nerve.
Supplies muscles of arm and elbow joint
artery (see Fig. 8.10)
Takes part in anastomoses around elbow joint
on its medial aspect
Muscular branches
Branches arise from brachial artery
Supplies biceps and triceps brachii muscles
Nutrient artery
Branch of brachial and enters the nutrient foramen
Supplies blood to red bone narrow
of humerus
Inferior ulnar collateral
Branch of brachial
Takes part in the anastomoses around
artery
elbow joint from medial side
RADIAL ARTERY
Starts as smaller branch of brachial artery, lies on the Muscles of lateral side of forearm,
(see Fig. 9.20)
lateral side of forearm, then in the anatomical snuff-
including the overlying skin. Gives a
box to reach the palm, where it continues as deep
branch for completion of superficial
palmar arch
palmar arch.
Digital branches to thumb and lateral side
of index finger
Radial recurrent artery
Branch of radial artery
Supplies elbow joint. Takes part in anasto-
(see Fig. 8.10)
moses around elbow joint
Muscular branches
Branches of radial artery
Muscles attached to radius, e.g. biceps
brachii, pronator teres, pronator quadratus,
flexor pollicis longus, flexor digitorum
superficialis
Superficial palmar
Branch of radial artery in lower part of forearm,
Crosses front of thenar muscles and joins
branch (see Fig. 9.20)
before radial artery winds posteriorly
the superficial branch of ulnar artery to
complete superficial palmar arch
Dorsal carpal branch
Branch of radial artery as it lies in the anatomical
Supplies wrist joint
snuffbox
Princeps pollicis artery
Branch of radial artery in palm, runs along thumb
Supplies muscles, tendons, skin and
(see Fig. 9.20)
joints in relation to thumb
--- Page 222 ---
NERVES, ARTERIES AND CLINICAL TERMS
Upper Limb
Section 1
Radialis indicis artery
Branch of radial artery in palm, runs along radial
Supplies tendons, joints and skin of
(see Fig. 9.20)
side of index finger
index finger
ULNAR ARTERY
Originates as the larger terminal branch of brachial
Gives branches to take part in the
(see Fig. 9.10)
artery at neck of radius. Courses first obliquely in
anastomoses around elbow joint.
upper one-third and then vertically in lower two-thirds Branches supply muscles of front of
of forearm. Lies superficial to flexor retinaculum and
forearm, back of forearm and nutrient
ends by dividing into superficial and deep branches
arteries to forearm bones
Anterior and posterior ulnar
Branches of ulnar artery curve upwards and reach
Take part in anastomoses around
recurrent arteries
elbow joint
elbow joint
(see Fig. 8.10)
Common interosseous
Large branch of ulnar artery
Supplies all the muscles of forearm
branches
a. Anterior interosseous
Branch of common interosseous artery runs on
Supplies both the bones of forearm and
artery
interosseous membrane
muscles attached to these bones
b. Posterior interosseous
Branch of common interosseous artery reaches
Supplies muscles of back of forearm.
artery
back of forearm
Also take part in anastomoses around
elbow joint
Superficial branch
Larger terminal branch of ulnar artery joins
Gives branches to tendon in the palm,
(see Fig. 9.20)
superficial palmar branch of radial artery to form
digital branches along fingers. Also
superficial palmar arch
supply joints and overlying skin
Deep branch (see Fig. 9.22)
Smaller terminal branch of ulnar artery that joins
Branches of deep palmar arch join the
with the terminal part of radial artery to form the
digital branches of superficial palmar
deep palmar arch which lies deep to the long
arch, supplementing the blood supply
flexor tendons of the palm. It is also proximal to
to the digits or fingers
the superficial palmar arch
Table A1.6: Arteries of upper limb (Contd...)
Artery
Origin, course and termination
Area of distribution
Fig. A1.3: Arteries of the upper limb
--- Page 223 ---
UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
SYMPATHETIC INNERVATION
1 The sympathetic innervation of the upper limb is
derived from the upper six thoracic segments of the
spinal cord. The fibres arise from the lateral horn
cells and come out with the ventral roots as
preganglionic (white rami) fibres. These fibres
ascend in the sympathetic chain to their appropriate
ganglia for relay.
2 The postganglionic (grey rami) fibres emerge from
the middle and inferior cervical and the first
thoracic (stellate) sympathetic ganglia, and join the
five roots (C5–C8, T1) of the brachial plexus.
3 The blood vessels to the skeletal muscles are dilated
by the sympathetic activity. To the skin, however,
these nerves are vasomotor, sudomotor and pilomotor.
Competency achievement: The student should be able to:
AN 13.8 Describe development of upper limb.1
EMBRYOLOGY OF THE UPPER LIMB
1 The upper limb bud appears on the ventrolateral
aspect of the body wall opposite the lower cervical
segments, at the end of the fourth week of
development. The development of the upper limb
precedes that of the lower limb by a few days.
2 Most investigators believe that the muscles of the
upper limb develop in situ from the local mesoderm,
and do not receive by contribution from the somites.
3 The axis artery of the upper limb develops from
the seventh cervical intersegmental artery. In
adults, it persists as axillary, brachial and anterior
interosseous arteries, and as the deep palmar arch.
The other arteries are secondary outgrowth from
the axial artery.
4 Limb muscles: Mesenchyme from dorsolateral cells
of somites thickens to form muscles. Muscles are
derived from several segments. Spinal nerves
supply muscles and also provide sensory nerves
for dermatomes. Radial nerve is formed by
combination of dorsal segmental branches. Ulnar
and median nerves are formed by combination of
ventral branches.
Molecular Regulation of Limb Development
1 Limb outgrowth in the forelimb is initiated by
T-box family 5 (for transcription); brachyury gene
for tail growth (TBX 5) and fibroblast growth factor
10 (FGF 10).
2 Positioning of limb along craniocaudal axis is
regulated by homeobox genes (HOX genes).
3 Apical ectodermal ridge formation is induced by
bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) by signaling
through homeobox gene muscle segment homeobox
(MSX 2).
4 Patterning of anteroposterior axis of limb is
controlled by zone of polarizing activity (ZPA) by
secreting retinoic acid (RA) and sonic hedgehog
(SHH).
5 Distal growth of the limb is affected by progressive
zone, which in turn is maintained by FGF4 and
FGF8.
Molecular Regulation of Muscle Development
Lateral plate mesoderm expresses BMP4 and FGFs
which with the help of wingless/integrated (WNT)
proteins from adjacent ectoderm signal upper lateral
cells of dermomyotome to express muscle specific gene
muscle differentiation (MyoD).
MyoD and myogenic factor 5 (Myf5) are members
of family of transcription factor called myogenic
regulatory factors (MRFs). These activate pathways for
muscle development.
Molecular basis for Laterality Sequencing
The molecular basis for laterality sequencing is the
accumulation of the signaling molecules, the serotonin
[5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT)], mnodal and fibroblast
growth factor 8 (FGF8) on left side and monoamine
oxidase (MAO) on right side. The paried like homeo-
domain 2 (PITX2) is the master gene for left sidedness.
CLINICAL TERMS
Shoulder joint may be dislocated inferiorly: The
shoulder joint is surrounded by short muscles on all
aspects except inferiorly. Since the joint is quite
mobile, it dislocates at the unprotected site, i.e.
inferiorly (see Fig. 2.18).
Student’s elbow: Inflammation of the bursa over
the insertion of triceps brachii is called student’s
elbow. It is common in students as they use the
flexed elbow to support the head while attempting
hard to listen to the lectures in between their ‘naps’
(see Fig. 10.16b).
Tennis elbow: Lateral epicondylitis occurs in
players of lawn tennis or table tennis. The extensor
muscles of forearm are used to hit the ball sharply,
causing repeated microtrauma to the lateral
epicondyle and its subsequent inflammation (see
Fig. 10.16a). It may be a degenerative condition.
Pulled elbow: While pulling the children by their
hands (getting them off the bus), the head of radius
may slip out of the annular ligament. Annular
ligament is not tight in children as in adults, so the
head of radius slips out (see Fig. 2.25).
Boxer’s palsy or swimmer’s palsy: Serratus anterior
causes the movement of protraction. If the long
thoracic nerve is injured, the muscle gets paralysed,
--- Page 224 ---
NERVES, ARTERIES AND CLINICAL TERMS
Upper Limb
Section 1
seen as ‘winging of scapula’ (see Fig. 2.12). Such a
person cannot hit his opponent by that hand. Neither
can he make strokes while swimming.
Golfer’s elbow/medial epicondylitis: Occurs in
golf players. Repeated microtrauma to medial
epicondyles causes inflammation of common flexor
origin and pain in flexing the wrist (see Fig. 10.17).
Waiter’s tip or policeman’s tip: ‘Taking the tip
quietly’ Erb–Duchenne paralysis occurs due to
involvement of Erb’s point. At Erb’s point, C5, C6
roots join to form upper trunk, two divisions of the
trunk arise and two branches, the suprascapular and
nerve to subclavius also arise (see Fig. 4.16).
Wrist drop: Paralysis of radial nerve in axilla or
radial sulcus or anterolateral side of lower part of
arm or paralysis of its deep branch in cubital fossa
leads to wrist drop (see Fig. 8.25).
Carpal tunnel syndrome: Median nerve gets
compressed under the flexor retinaculum, leading
to paralysis of muscles of thenar eminence. It is called
‘ape-like or monkey-like hand’. There is loss of
sensation in lateral 3½ digits including nail beds.
Median nerve is the ‘eye of the hand’. There is little
clawing of index and middle fingers also (see
Figs 9.40 to 9.44).
Cubital tunnel syndrome: Ulnar nerve gets
entrapped between two heads of flexor carpi ulnaris
muscle, leading to paralysis of medial half of flexor
digitorum profundus and muscles of hypothenar
eminence, all interossei and adductor pollicis and 3rd
and 4th lumbricals. There is clawing of medial two
digits, gutters in the hand and loss of hypothenar
eminence (see Figs 9.35 and 9.36).
Volkmann’s ischaemic contracture: This condition
occurs due to fibrosis of the muscles of the forearm,
chiefly the flexors. It usually occurs with injury to
the brachial artery in supracondylar fractures of
humerus (see Fig. 2.16b).
Dupuytren’s contracture: This clinical condition is
due to fibrosis of medial part of palmar aponeurosis
especially the part reaching the ring and little fingers.
The fibrous bands are attached to proximal and
middle phalanges and not to distal phalanges. So
proximal and middle phalanges are flexed, while
distal phalanges remain extended (see Fig. 9.18).
Funny bone: Ulnar nerve is palpable in flexed elbow
behind the medial epicondyle. Palpating the nerve
gives rise to funny sensations in the medial side of
forearm. Since medial epicondyle is part of humerus,
it is called humerus or funny bone (see Fig. 2.15).
Pointing finger: Branch of anterior interosseous
nerve to lateral half of flexor digitorum profundus
is injured in the middle of the forearm. The index
finger is affected the most. It remains extended and
keeps pointing forwards (despite the fact that
remaining three fingers are pointing towards self)
(see Fig. 9.39).
Complete claw hand: Complete claw hand is due
to injury of lower trunk of brachial plexus especially
the root, which supplies intrinsic muscles of hand.
The injury is called ‘Klumpke’s paralysis’. The
metacarpophalangeal joints are extended while both
the interphalangeal joints of all fingers are actually
flexed (see Fig. 9.45).
Breast: The breast is a frequent site of carcinoma
(cancer). Several anatomical facts are of importance
in diagnosis and treatment of this condition.
Abscesses may also form in the breast and may
require drainage. The following facts are worthy to
note.
Incisions into the breast are usually made radially
to avoid cutting the lactiferous ducts (see Fig. 3.9).
Cancer cells may infiltrate the suspensory
ligaments. The breast then becomes fixed. Con-
traction of the ligaments can cause retraction or
puckering (folding) of the skin.
Infiltration of lactiferous ducts and their
consequent fibrosis can cause retraction of the skin.
Obstruction of superficial lymph vessels by cancer
cells may produce oedema of the skin giving rise to
an appearance like that of the skin of an orange
(peau d’orange appearance) (see Fig. 3.16).
Because of bilateral communications of the
lymphatics of the breast across the midline, cancer
may spread from one breast to the other (see
Fig. 3.17).
Because of communications of the lymph vessels
with those in the abdomen, cancer of the breast may
spread to the liver. Cancer cells may ‘drop’ into the
pelvis especially ovary (Krukenberg’s tumour)
producing secondaries there (see Fig. 3.17).
Apart from the lymphatics, cancer may spread
through the veins. In this connection, it is important
to know that the veins draining the breast
communicate with the vertebral venous plexus of
veins. Through these communications, cancer can
spread to the vertebrae and to the brain (see Fig. 3.17).
Ligaments of Cooper: Fibrous strands extending
between skin overlying the breast to the underlying
pectoral muscles. These support the gland.
Montgomery’s glands: Glands beneath the areola
of mammary gland.
Subareolar plexus of Sappey: Lymphatic plexus
beneath the areola of the breast.
Blood pressure: The blood pressure is universally
recorded by auscultating the brachial artery on the
anteromedial aspect of the elbow joint (see Fig. 8.11).
--- Page 225 ---
UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
Intravenous injection: The median cubital vein is
the vein of choice for intravenous injections, for
withdrawing blood from donors, and for cardiac
catheterisation, because it is fixed by the perforator
and does not slip away during piercing (see Fig. 7.8).
Intramuscular injection: Intramuscular injections
are often given into the deltoid. They should be given
in the middle of the muscle to avoid injury to the
axillary nerve (see Fig. 6.9).
Radial pulse: The radial artery is used for feeling
the (arterial) pulse at the wrist. The pulsation can be
felt well in this situation because of the presence of
the flat radius behind the artery (see Fig. 9.10).
Lister’s tubercle: Dorsal tubercle on lower end of
posterior surface of radius. This acts as a pulley for
the tendon of extensor pollicis longus (see Fig. 2.20).
1. Enumerate:
• Branches of radial nerve in axilla and in radial
sulcus
• Branches of median nerve in forearm
• Branches of median nerve in palm
• Branches of ulnar nerve in palm
• Branches of musculocutaneous nerve
• Branches of brachial artery
• Branches of ulnar artery in forearm
• Branches of radial artery in forearm
• The palpable arteries in upper limb
• Branches of superficial palmar arch
A. Match the following on the left side with their
appropriate answers on the right side:
1. The nerve injury and the clinical signs:
a. Radial nerve
i. Partial claw hand
b. Median nerve
ii. Wrist drop
c. Long thoracic nerve iii. Ape thumb
d. Ulnar nerve
iv. Winging of scapula
2. Tendon reflexes and segmental innervation:
a. Triceps
i. C5, C6, C7
b. Biceps brachii
ii. C5, C6
c. Brachioradialis
iii. C6, C7, C8
3. Muscles and the movements at shoulder joints:
a. Deltoid
i. Medial rotation
b. Subscapularis
ii. Lateral rotation
c. Latissimus dorsi
iii. Abduction
d. Teres minor
iv. Extension
4. Muscles and their nerve supply:
a. Deltoid
i. Ulnar
b. Supinator
ii. Median
c. 1st lumbrical
iii. Axillary
d. Adductor pollicis iv. Radial
5. Sensory innervation of skin:
a. Palmar surface of ring
 i. C3, C4
and little fingers
b. Palmar surface of
 ii. C8
thumb and index finger
c. Medial aspect of arm
iii. T1, T2
d. Tip of the shoulder
iv. C6
de Quervain’s disease is a thickening of sheath
around tendons of abductor pollicis longus and
extensor pollicis brevis giving rise to pain on lateral
side of wrist.
FURTHER READING
• Birch R. Latrogenous injuries. In: Surgical Disorders of the
Peripheral Nerves, 2nd ed. London: Springer-Verlag: 2011;
483–526.
• O'Rahilly R, Gdner E. The timing and sequence of events in
the development of the limbs in the human embryo. Anat
Embryol 1975;148:1–23.
A description of the stages in human limb development.
1 From Medical Council of India, Competency based Undergraduate Curriculum for the Indian Medical Graduate, 2018;1:44–80.
--- Page 226 ---
NERVES, ARTERIES AND CLINICAL TERMS
Upper Limb
Section 1
For each of the incomplete statements or
questions below, one or more completions or
answers given is/are correct. Select.
A.If only a, b and c are correct
B. If only a and c are correct
C. If only b and d are correct
D.If only d is correct
E. If all are correct
6. Injury to the median nerve in the arm would affect:
a. Pronation of the forearm
b. Flexion of the wrist
c. Flexion of the thumb
d. Supination of the forearm
7. Which of the following is/are true regarding
humerus?
a. The head of the humerus commonly dislocates
posteriorly.
b. Common sites of fracture are surgical neck, shaft
and supracondylar region
c. Lower end is the growing end.
d. Axillary, radial and ulnar nerves are directly
related to the bone
8. Clavicle:
a. Is a long bone
b. Develops by intramembranous ossification
c. Is the first bone to ossify
d. Has a well-developed medullary cavity
9. In Erb’s paralysis:
a. Abduction and lateral rotation of the arm are lost
b. Flexion and pronation of the forearm are lost
c. Biceps and supinator jerks are lost
d. Sensations are lost over the medial side of the
10. Which of the following statements is/are true
regarding ‘mammary gland’?
a. It is modified sweat gland
b. Lies in superficial fascia
c. 75% of the lymph from mammary gland drains
into axillary lymph nodes
d. Some lymphatic vessels communicate with the
lymph vessels of opposite side
1. a.–ii,
b.–iii,
c.–iv,
d.–i,
2. a.–iii,
b.–ii,
c.–i,
3. a.–iii,
b.–i,
c.–iv,
d.–ii,
4. a.–iii,
b.–iv,
c.–ii,
d.–i
5. a.–ii,
b.–iv,
c.–iii,
d.–i,
6. A
7. C
8. A
9. B
10. E.
--- Page 228 ---
SPOTS ON UPPER LIMB
a. Identify the muscle.
b. Name its nerve
supply.
a. Identify the cord of
brachial plexus.
b. Enumerate its
branches.
a. Identify the muscle.
b. Name its heads.
a. Identify the area.
b. Name its contents in
order.
a. Identify the joint.
b. Name its movements.
a. Identify the nerve.
b. Name its muscular
branches in the palm.
a. Identify the structure
on right middle
finger
b. Name the muscles
inserted.
a. Identify the structure.
b. Name the structures
lying on its superficial
aspect.
a. Identify the structure.
b. Name the contents of
its 4th compartment.
a. Identify the muscle.
b. Name the nerves
supplying it.
--- Page 229 ---
UPPER LIMB
Upper Limb
Section 1
a. Pectoralis major
b. Medial pectoral and lateral pectoral nerves
a. Medial cord of brachial plexus
b. •
Medial pectoral
Medial cutaneous nerve of arm
Medial cutaneous nerve of forearm
Ulnar nerve
Medial root of median
a. Biceps brachii
b. Long head and short head
a. Cubital fossa
b. •
Median nerve
Brachial artery
Tendon of biceps brachii
Radial nerve
a. Median nerve
b. •
Flexor pollicis brevis
Abductor pollicis brevis
Opponens pollicis
1st and 2nd lumbricals
a. 1st carpometacarpal joint
b. •
Flexion with medial rotation
Extension with lateral rotation
Abduction
Adduction
Opposition
a. Extensor expansion of right middle finger
b. •
Tendon of extensor digitorum
2nd lumbrical
2nd and 3rd dorsal interossei
a. Flexor retinaculum
b. •
Palmar cutaneous branch of median nerve
Tendon of palmaris longus
Palmar cutaneous branch of ulnar nerve
Ulnar artery
Ulnar nerve
a. Extensor retinaculum
b. •
Tendon of extensor digitorum
Tendon of extensor indicis
Anterior interosseous artery
Posterior interosseous nerve
a. Flexor digitorum profundus
b. Medial half by ulnar nerve and lateral half by anterior interosseous branch of median nerve
ANSWERS: SPOTS ON UPPER LIMB
--- Page 230 ---
Thorax
12. Introduction
13. Bones and Joints of Thorax
14. Walls of Thorax
15. Thoracic Cavity and Pleurae
16. Lungs
17. Mediastinum
18. Pericardium and Heart
19. Superior Vena Cava, Aorta and Pulmonary Trunk
20. Trachea, Oesophagus and Thoracic Duct
 21. Surface Marking and Radiological Anatomy of Thorax
Appendix 2: Autonomic Nervous System, Arteries, Nerves and Clinical Terms 338
Spots on Thorax
--- Page 231 ---
Ichchak dana, beechak dana, dane upar dana
Hands naache, feet naache, brain hai khushnama
Ichchak dana.
Closed cage mai baitha ek naajuk bechara
lub dub, lub dub hi karta hai ye aawara
Lekin iska bahut sensitive hai mijajana
agar tute to mushkil hai samjhana
is liye kisi ka “ye” na dukhana
Ichchak dana
Bolo kya—heart, bolo kya—heart
--- Page 232 ---
Thorax (Latin chest) forms the upper part of the trunk
of the body. It not only permits boarding and lodging
of the thoracic viscera, but also provides necessary
shelter to some of the abdominal viscera.
The trunk of the body is divided by the diaphragm
into an upper part, called the thorax, and a lower part,
called the abdomen. The thorax is supported by a
skeletal framework, thoracic cage. The thoracic cavity
contains the principal organs of respiration—the lungs
and of circulation—the heart, both of which are vital
for life.
SURFACE LANDMARKS OF THORAX
Bony Landmarks
1 Suprasternal or jugular notch (Fig. 12.1): It is felt just
above the superior border of the manubrium
between the sternal ends of the clavicles. It lies at
the level of the lower border of the body of the
second thoracic vertebra. The trachea can be
palpated in this notch.
2 Sternal angle/angle of Louis: It is felt as a transverse
ridge about 5 cm below the suprasternal notch. It
marks the manubriosternal joint, and lies at the level
of the second costal cartilage anteriorly, and the disc
between the fourth and fifth thoracic vertebrae
posteriorly. This is an important landmark for the
following reasons.
a. The ribs are counted from this level downwards.
There is no other reliable point (anteriorly) from
which the ribs may be counted. The second costal
cartilage and second rib lie at the level of the
sternal angle or angle of Louis (French physician
1787–1872). The ribs are counted from here by
tracing the finger downwards and laterally
(because the lower costal cartilages are crowded
and the anterior parts of the intercostal spaces
are very narrow).
b. It marks the plane which separates the superior
mediastinum from the inferior mediastinum.
c. The ascending aorta ends at this level.
d. The arch of the aorta begins and also ends at this
level.
e. The descending aorta begins at this level.
f. The trachea divides into two principal bronchi.
g. The azygos vein arches over the root of the right
lung and opens into the superior vena cava.
h. The pulmonary trunk divides into two pulmonary
arteries just below this level.
i. The thoracic duct crosses from the right to the left
side at the level of the fifth thoracic vertebra and
reaches the left side at the level of the sternal angle.
j. It marks the upper limit of the base of the heart.
k. The cardiac plexuses are situated at the same level.
3 Xiphisternal joint: The costal margin on each side is
formed by the seventh to tenth costal cartilages.
Between the two costal margins, there lies the
Introduction
Pray as if everything depended on God and work as if everything depended upon man 
—Anonymous
Fig. 12.1: Shape and construction of the thoracic cage as seen
from the front
--- Page 233 ---
THORAX
Thorax
Section 2
infrasternal or subcostal angle. The depression in the
angle is also known as the epigastric fossa.
The xiphoid (Greek sword) process lies in the floor
of the epigastric fossa. At the apex of the angle, the
xiphisternal joint may be felt as a short transverse
ridge. It lies at the level of the upper border of the
ninth thoracic vertebra (Fig. 12.1).
4 Costal cartilages: The second costal (Latin rib) cartilage
is attached to the sternal angle. The seventh cartilage
bounds the upper part of the infrasternal angle. The
lateral border of the rectus abdominis or the linea
semilunaris joins the costal margin at the tip of the
ninth costal cartilage. The tenth costal cartilage forms
the lower part of the costal margin (Figs 12.1 and
12.2a).
5 Ribs: The scapula overlies the second to seventh ribs
on the posterolateral aspect of the chest wall. The
tenth rib is the lowest point, lies at the level of the
third lumbar vertebra. Though the eleventh rib is
longer than the twelfth, both of them are confined to
the back and are not seen from the front (Fig. 12.2b
and c).
6 Thoracic vertebral spines: The first prominent spine felt
at the lower part of the back of the neck is that of the
seventh cervical vertebra or vertebra prominens. Below this
spine, all the thoracic spines can be palpated along the
posterior median line (Fig. 12.3). The third thoracic
spine lies at the level of the roots of the spines of the
scapulae. The seventh thoracic spine lies at the level
of the inferior angles of the scapulae.
Soft Tissue Landmarks
1 The nipple: The position of the nipple varies
considerably in females, but in males it usually lies
in the fourth intercostal space about 10 cm from the
midsternal line (Fig. 12.4).
2 Apex beat: It is a visible and palpable cardiac impulse
in the left fifth intercostal space, 9 cm from the
midsternal line, or medial to the midclavicular line.
3 Trachea: It is palpable in the suprasternal notch
midway between the two clavicles.
4 Midclavicular: It is a vertical plane passing through
the midinguinal point, the tip of the ninth costal
cartilage and middle of clavicle (Fig. 12.5).
5 Midaxillary line: It passes vertically between the two
folds of the axilla (Fig. 12.5).
6 Scapular line: It passes vertically along the inferior
angle of the scapula.
SKELETON OF THORAX
The skeleton of thorax is also known as the thoracic
cage. It is an osseocartilaginous elastic cage which is
primarily designed for increasing and decreasing the
Fig. 12.2: Shape and construction of the thoracic cage as seen
from the (a) front, (b) lateral side and; (c) back
intrathoracic pressure, so that air is sucked into the
lungs during inspiration and expelled during
expiration.
FORMATION
Anteriorly, by the sternum (Greek chest) (Figs 12.1 and
12.2).
--- Page 234 ---
INTRODUCTION
Thorax
Section 2
Posteriorly, by the 12 thoracic vertebrae and the
intervening intervertebral discs (Fig. 12.3).
On each side, by 12 ribs with their cartilages.
Each rib articulates posteriorly with the vertebral
column. Anteriorly, only the upper seven ribs articulate
with the sternum through their cartilages and these
are called true or vertebrosternal ribs.
The costal cartilages of the next three ribs, i.e. the
eighth, ninth and tenth end by joining the next higher
costal cartilage. These ribs are, therefore, known as
vertebrochondral ribs. The costal cartilages of the
seventh, eighth, ninth and tenth ribs form the sloping
costal margin.
The anterior ends of the eleventh and twelfth ribs are
free: These are called floating or vertebral ribs. The
vertebrochondral and vertebral ribs, i.e. the last five ribs,
are also called false ribs because they do not articulate
with the sternum.
The costovertebral, costotransverse, manubrio-sternal
and chondrosternal joints permit movements of the
thoracic cage during breathing.
Fig. 12.5: Surface marking of midclavicular and midaxillary lines
Fig. 12.4: Soft tissue landmarks
Fig. 12.3: Shape and construction of the thoracic cage as seen
from behind
--- Page 235 ---
THORAX
Thorax
Section 2
SHAPE
The thorax resembles a truncated cone which is narrow
above and broad below (Fig. 12.7). The narrow upper
end is continuous with the root of the neck from which
it is partly separated by the suprapleural membrane or
Sibson’s fascia. The broad or lower end is almost
completely separated from the abdomen by the
diaphragm which is deeply concave downwards. The
thoracic cavity is actually much smaller than what it
appears to be because the narrow upper part appears
broad due to the shoulders, and the lower part is greatly
encroached upon by the abdominal cavity due to the
upward convexity of the diaphragm.
In transverse section, the thorax is reniform (bean-
shaped, or kidney-shaped). The transverse diameter is
greater than the anteroposterior diameter. However,
in infants below the age of two years, it is circular. In
quadrupeds, the anteroposterior diameter is greater
than the transverse, as shown in Fig. 12.8.
In infants, the ribs are horizontal and as a result the
respiration is purely abdominal by the action of the
diaphragm.
In adults, the thorax is oval. The ribs are oblique and
their movements alternately increase and decrease the
diameters of the thorax. This results in the drawing in
of air into the thorax called inspiration and its expulsion
is called expiration. This is called thoracic respiration. In
the adult, we, therefore, have both abdominal and
thoracic respirations.
Fig. 12.6: Vulnerable site of fracture of the rib
CLINICAL ANATOMY
• Diaphragm descends during inspiration to
increase the vertical diameter of thoracic cage.
• Hiccups: These occur due to spasmodic involun-
tary contractions of the diaphragm accompanied
by closed glottis. These usually occur due to
gastric irritation. Hiccups may also be due to
phrenic nerve irritation, uraemia or hysteria.
CLINICAL ANATOMY
The chest wall of the child is highly elastic, and
fractures of the ribs are, therefore, rare. In adults,
the ribs may be fractured by direct or indirect
violence (Fig. 12.6). In indirect violence, like crush
injury, the rib fractures at its weakest point located
at the angle. The upper two ribs which are protected
by the clavicle, and the lower two ribs which are free
to swing are least commonly injured.
Fig. 12.7: Scheme to show how the size of the thoracic cavity
is reduced by the upward projection of the diaphragm, and by
the inward projection of the shoulders
Fig. 12.8: The shape of the thorax as seen in transverse section
in: Human adult, infants, and quadrupeds
--- Page 236 ---
INTRODUCTION
Thorax
Section 2
the thorax from the neck. The membrane is triangular in
shape. Its apex is attached to the tip of the transverse
process of the seventh cervical vertebra and the base to the
inner border of the first rib and its cartilage.
Morphologically, Sibson’s fascia is regarded as the
flattened tendon of the scalenus minimus (pleuralis)
muscle. It is thus formed by scalenus minimus and
endothoracic fascia. Functionally, it provides rigidity to
the thoracic inlet, so that the root of the neck is not puffed
up and down during respiration. The inferior surface
of the membrane is fused to the cervical pleura, beneath
which lies the apex of the lung. Its superior surface is
related to the subclavian vessels and other structures at
the root of the neck (Figs 12.10 and 12.11a and b).
Fig. 12.9: The plane of the inlet of the thorax
Fig. 12.10: Thoracic inlet showing cervical dome of the pleura on left side of body and its relationship to inner border of first rib
Competency achievement: The student should be able to:
AN 21.3 Describe and demonstrate the boundaries of thoracic
inlet, cavity and outlet.1
SUPERIOR APERTURE/INLET OF THORAX
The narrow upper end of the thorax, which is
continuous with the neck, is called the inlet of the
thorax (Fig. 12.9). It is kidney-shaped. Its transverse
diameter is 10–12.5 cm. The anteroposterior diameter
is about 5 cm.
Boundaries
Anteriorly: Upper border of the manubrium sterni.
Posteriorly: Superior surface of the body of the first
thoracic vertebra.
On each side: First rib with its cartilage.
The plane of the inlet is directed downwards and
forwards with an obliquity of about 45°. The anterior
part of the inlet lies 3.7 cm below the posterior part, so
that the upper border of the manubrium sterni lies at
the level of the upper border of the third thoracic
vertebra.
Partition at the Inlet of Thorax
The partition is in two halves—right and left, with a cleft
in between. Each half is covered by a fascia, known as
Sibson’s fascia or suprapleural membrane. It partly separates
--- Page 237 ---
THORAX
Thorax
Section 2
Structures Passing through the Inlet of Thorax
Viscera
Trachea, oesophagus, apices of the lungs with pleura,
remains of the thymus. Figure 12.12 depicts the
structures passing through the inlet of the thorax.
Large Vessels
Brachiocephalic artery on right side.
Left common carotid artery and the left subclavian
artery on the left side. Right and left brachiocephalic
veins.
Smaller Vessels
1 Right and left internal thoracic arteries
2 Right and left superior intercostal arteries
3 Right and left first posterior intercostal veins
4 Inferior thyroid veins
Nerves
1 Right and left phrenic nerves
2 Right and left vagus nerves
3 Right and left sympathetic trunks
4 Right and left first thoracic nerves as they ascend
across the first rib to join the brachial plexus.
Muscles
Sternohyoid, sternothyroid and longus colli
Figs 12.11a and b: The suprapleural membrane: (a) Surface view, and (b) sectional view
Fig. 12.12: Structures passing through the inlet of the thorax
--- Page 238 ---
INTRODUCTION
Thorax
Section 2
CLINICAL ANATOMY
• A cervical rib is a rib attached to vertebra C7. It
occurs in about 0.5% of subjects (Fig. 12.13). Such
a rib may exert traction on the lower trunk of the
brachial plexus which arches over a cervical rib.
Such a person complains of paraesthesia or
abnormal sensations along the ulnar border of the
forearm, and wasting of the small muscles of the
hand supplied by segment T1 (Fig. 12.14).
Vascular changes may also occur.
• In coarctation or narrowing of the aorta, the
posterior intercostal arteries get enlarged greatly
to provide a collateral circulation. Pressure of the
enlarged arteries produces characteristic notching
Fig. 12.14: Wasting of small muscles of hand
on the ribs (Fig. 12.15) especially in their posterior
parts.
• Thoracic inlet syndrome: Two structures arch over
the first rib—the subclavian artery and first
thoracic nerve. These structures may be pulled or
pressed by a cervical rib or by variations in the
insertion of the scalenus anterior. The symptoms
may, therefore, be vascular, neural, or both.
INFERIOR APERTURE/OUTLET OF THORAX
The inferior aperture is the broad end of the thorax
which surrounds the upper part of the abdominal cavity,
but is separated from it by the diaphragm (Greek across
fence).
Boundaries
Anteriorly: Infrasternal angle between the two costal
margins.
Posteriorly: Inferior surface of the body of the twelfth
thoracic vertebra.
On each side: Costal margin formed by the cartilages of
seventh to twelfth ribs.
Diaphragm at the Outlet of Thorax
The outlet is closed by a large musculotendinous
partition, called the diaphragm—the thoracoabdominal
diaphragm—which separates the thorax from the
abdomen.
Fig. 12.15: Tortuous intercostal artery receives blood from
anterior intercostal artery, transfers it to descending aorta
beyond coarctation. Tortuous intercostal artery produces
notches in the rib
Fig. 12.13: Cervical rib on both sides
--- Page 239 ---
THORAX
Thorax
Section 2
Table 12.1: Large openings in thoracoabdominal diaphragm
Opening
Situation
Shape
Structures passing
Effect on contraction
Vena cava
T8, right part of
Quadrilateral
Dilation
central tendon
Right phrenic nerve
Lymphatic of liver
Oesophageal
T10, splitting of
Elliptical
Oesophagus
Constriction
right crus
Both vagal trunks
Left gastric vessels
Aortic
T12, behind
Rounded
Aorta
No change
median arcuate
Thoracic duct
ligament
Azygos vein
Structures Passing through the Diaphragm
There are three large and several small openings in the
diaphragm which allow passage to structures from
thorax to abdomen or vice versa (Fig. 12.16).
Large openings: These are vena caval opening in the
central tendon, oesophageal opening in the right crus
of diaphragm and aortic opening behind the median
arcuate ligament.
The structures passing through large openings are
put in Table 12.1.
Small openings: Superior epigastric artery passes in
space of Larrey present between slip of xiphoid process
and 7th costal cartilaginous slip of the diaphragm.
When foramen is enlarged it is known as foramen of
Morgagni.
Musculophrenic artery perforates diaphragm at the
level of 9th costal cartilage.
Lower 5 intercostal vessels and nerves pass between
costal origins of diaphragm and transversus abdominis.
Subcostal vessels and nerves pass behind lateral
arcuate ligament. Sympathetic trunk passes behind
medial arcuate ligament. Greater and lesser splanchnic
nerves pierce each crus. Left phrenic nerve pierces left
cupola.
Fig. 12.16: Structures passing through the diaphragm
--- Page 240 ---
INTRODUCTION
Thorax
Section 2
CLINICOANATOMICAL PROBLEM
A young adult suffering from chronic anaemia was
asked to get sternal puncture done to find out the
reason for anaemia.
• What is sternal puncture/bone marrow biopsy?
• Classify bones according to shape.
Ans: The sternum is single median line bone in the
anterior part of the thoracic cage. It is a flat bone. Its
upper part, manubrium is wider and comprises two
plates of compact bone with intervening cancellous
bone. During sternal puncture, a thick needle is
pierced through the skin, fascia and anterior plate of
compact bone till it reaches the bone marrow in the
cancellous bone. About 0.3 cc of bone marrow is
aspirated and slides are prepared immediately to be
stained and studied to find out, if the defect is in
maturation of RBC or WBC.
Bones are classified as long bone, e.g. humerus;
short bone, e.g. tarsal bones; flat bone, e.g. sternum;
irregular bone, e.g. vertebra; sesamoid bone, e.g.
patella; pneumatic bone, e.g. maxilla.
FURTHER READING
• Celli B. The diaphragm and respiratory muscles. Chest Surg
Clin N Am 1998;8:207–24.
1. Three large openings in the diaphragm are at levels
of which of the following thoracic vertebrae?
a. T8, T9, T10
b. T7, T8, T9
c. T8, T10, T12
d. T9, T10 T12
2. All the following structures course through the
inlet of thorax in the median plane, except:
a. Trachea
b. Oesophagus
c. Thymus
d. Left recurrent laryngeal nerve
3. Suprapleural membrane is attached to:
a. Anterior aspect of clavicle
b. Upper border of scapula
c. Inner margin of 1st rib and its cartilage
d. Transverse process of 6th cervical vertebra
1. Enumerate the landmarks at the level of sternal
angle.
2. Enumerate various structures passing through the
inlet of thorax.
3. Write short notes on:
a. Boundaries of thorax
b. Cervical rib
c. Main openings in the thoracoabdominal
diaphragm, including their levels and contents
d. Sternal puncture/bone marrow biopsy
e. Coarctation of aorta
4. Enumerate the parts of rib and the joints formed by
a typical rib.
FACTS TO REMEMBER
• Thoracic cavity houses a single heart with
pericardium, two lungs with pleurae, blood
vessels, nerves and lymphatics.
• Rib may be present in relation to cervical seven
and lumbar one vertebrae. The cervical rib may
give symptoms.
• Ribs are weak at their angles and are vulnerable
to injury at that area.
• Apex beat lies below and medial to the normally
placed left nipple.
• 2nd costal cartilage at the manubriosternal angle
is extremely important landmark. The 2nd
intercostal space lies below this cartilage and is
used for counting the intercostal spaces for the
position of heart, lungs and liver.
• 1–7 ribs with costal cartilages reach the sternum,
costal cartilages of 8–10 ribs form the costal
margin, while 11th and 12th ribs do not reach the
front at all.
1 From Medical Council of India, Competency based Undergraduate Curriculum for the Indian Medical Graduate, 2018;1:44–80.
--- Page 241 ---
THORAX
Thorax
Section 2
• What is the importance of sternal angle?
• Name the types of ribs.
• Name the structures passing through the inlet of
thorax.
• What symptoms can occur due to fracture of cervical rib?
• Where is the apex beat normally palpable?
• Name the main openings in the diaphragm.
• What structures pass through the aortic opening?
4. The outlet of thorax is highest in which of the
following lines?
a. Posterior median
b. Anterior median
c. Midaxillary
d. Scapular line
5. Which spinal nerve is affected in thoracic inlet
syndrome?
a. Seventh cervical
b. Eighth cervical
c. First thoracic
d. Second thoracic
1. c
2. d
3. c
4. b
5. c
--- Page 242 ---
INTRODUCTION
The thorax is an osseocartilaginous cavity or cage for
various viscera, providing them due support and pro-
tection. This cage is not static, but dynamic, as it moves
at its various joints, increasing or decreasing the various
diameters of the cavity for an extremely important
process of respiration, which is life for all of us.
Competency achievement: The student should be able to:
AN 21.1 Identify and describe the salient features of sternum,
typical rib, Ist rib and typical thoracic vertebra.1
BONES OF THORAX
RIBS OR COSTAE
1 There are 12 ribs on each side forming the greater
part of the thoracic skeleton.
The number may be increased by development of a
cervical or a lumbar rib; or the number may be
reduced to 11 by the absence of the twelfth rib.
2 The ribs are bony arches arranged one below the
other (Fig. 13.1). The gaps between the ribs are called
intercostal spaces (see Fig. 12.1).
The spaces are deeper in front than behind, and
deeper between the upper than between the lower
ribs.
3 The ribs are placed obliquely, the upper ribs being
less oblique than the lower. The obliquity reaches
its maximum at the ninth rib, and thereafter it
gradually decreases to the twelfth rib.
4 The length of the ribs increases from the first to the
seventh ribs, and then gradually decreases from the
eighth to twelfth ribs.
5 The breadth of the ribs decreases from above
downwards. In the upper 10 ribs, the anterior ends
are broader than the posterior ends.
Classification
a. According to articulations with sternum the ribs are true
and false: The first 7 ribs which are connected through
their cartilages to the sternum are called true ribs, or
vertebrosternal ribs. The remaining five are false ribs.
Out of these, the cartilages of the eighth, ninth and
tenth ribs are joined to the next higher cartilage and
are known as vertebrochondral ribs. The anterior ends
of the eleventh and twelfth ribs are free and are called
floating ribs or vertebral ribs.
b. According to morphological features the ribs are atypical
and typical: The first two and last three ribs have
special features, and are atypical ribs. The third to
ninth ribs are typical ribs.
Typical Ribs
Side Determination
1 The anterior end bears a concave depression. The
posterior end bears a head, a neck and a tubercle.
Bones and Joints of Thorax
Vegetarianism, nonviolence and compassion for all beings are fundamental to health, healing and social order 
—Rig Veda
Fig. 13.1: A typical rib of the left side
--- Page 243 ---
THORAX
Thorax
Section 2
2 The shaft is convex outwards and there is a costal
groove situated along the lower part of its inner
surface, so that the lower border is thin and the upper
border is rounded.
Features
Each rib has two ends—anterior and posterior. Its shaft
comprises upper and lower borders and outer and inner
surfaces.
The anterior sternal end is oval and concave for
articulation with its costal cartilage.
The posterior or vertebral end is made up of the
following parts.
1 The head has two facets that are separated
by a crest. The lower larger facet articulates with the
body of the numerically corresponding vertebra
while the upper smaller facet articulates with the next
higher vertebra (Figs 13.2 and 13.24).
2 The neck lies in front of the transverse process of its
own vertebra, and has two surfaces—anterior and
posterior; and two borders—superior and inferior.
The anterior surface of the neck is smooth. The
posterior surface is rough. The superior border or
crest of the neck is thin. The inferior border is rounded.
3 The tubercle is placed on the outer surface of the rib
at the junction of the neck and shaft. Its medial part
is articular and forms the costotransverse joint with
the transverse process of the corresponding vertebra.
The lateral part is non-articular (Fig. 13.1).
The shaft is flattened so it has two surfaces—outer
and inner; and two borders—upper and lower. The
shaft is curved with its convexity outwards (Fig. 13.3).
It is bent at the angle which is situated about 5 cm lateral
to the tubercle. It is also twisted at the angle.
1 The outer surface: The angle is marked by an oblique
line on the outer surface, directed downwards and
laterally.
2 The inner surface is smooth and covered by the pleura.
This surface is marked by a ridge which is continuous
behind with the lower border of the neck. The costal
groove lies between this ridge and the inferior
border. The costal groove contains the posterior
intercostal vessels and intercostal nerve (Fig. 13.4).
3 The upper border is thick and has outer and inner lips.
Attachments and Relations of a Typical Rib
1 Anteriorly, the head provides attachment to the
radiate ligament (Fig. 13.5) and is related to the
sympathetic chain and to the costal pleura.
2 The crest of the head provides attachment to the
intra-articular ligament of the costovertebral joint.
3 Attachments to the neck:
a. The anterior surface is covered by costal pleura.
b. The inferior costotransverse ligament is attached
to the rough posterior surface (Fig. 13.5).
c. The two laminae of the superior costotransverse
ligament are attached to the crest of the neck
(Fig. 13.6).
4 The lateral non-articular part of the tubercle gives
attachment to the lateral costotransverse ligament
(Fig. 13.5).
Fig. 13.4: Contents of costal groove and intercostal muscles
Fig. 13.3: A costal arch (side view)
Fig. 13.2: Articulations of the 5th rib
--- Page 244 ---
BONES AND JOINTS OF THORAX
Thorax
Section 2
5 Attachments on the shaft:
a. The thoracolumbar fascia and the lateral fibres of
the sacrospinalis muscle are attached to the angle.
Medial to the angle, the levator costae and the
sacrospinalis (longissimus) are attached (Fig. 13.8).
About 5 cm from the anterior end, there is an
indistinct oblique line, known as the anterior angle,
which separates the origins of the external oblique
from serratus anterior in case of fifth to eighth ribs.
The anterior angle also separates the origin of
external oblique from that of latissimus dorsi in
case of ninth and tenth ribs (Fig. 13.8b).
b. The internal intercostal muscle arises from the
floor of the costal groove. The intercostalis intimus
arises from the middle two-fourths of the ridge
above the groove (Fig. 13.4). The subcostalis is
attached to the inner surfaces of the lower ribs.
c. The external intercostal muscle is attached on the
outer lip of the upper border, while the internal
intercostal and intercostalis intimi are attached on
the inner lip of the upper border (Fig. 13.4).
OSSIFICATION OF A TYPICAL RIB
A typical rib ossifies in cartilage from:
a One primary centre (for the shaft) which appears,
near the angle, at about the eighth week of
intrauterine life.
b Three secondary centres, one for the head and two
for the tubercle, which appear at puberty and unite
with the rest of the bone after 20 years.
Competency achievement: The student should be able to:
AN 21.2 Identify and describe the features of 2nd, 11th and 12th
ribs, 1st, 11th and 12th thoracic vertebrae.2
First Rib
Identification
1 It is the shortest, broadest and most curved rib.
2 The shaft is not twisted. There is no costal groove.
3 It is flattened from above downwards so that it has
superior and inferior surfaces; and outer and inner
borders.
Side Determination
1 The anterior end is larger, thicker and pitted. The
posterior end is small and rounded.
2 The outer border is convex with no costal groove.
3 The upper surface of the shaft is crossed obliquely
by two shallow grooves separated by a ridge. The
ridge is enlarged at the inner border of the rib to form
the scalene tubercle (Fig. 13.7a).
When the rib is placed on a horizontal plane, i.e. with
the superior surface facing upwards, both the ends of
the rib touch the surface.
Fig. 13.5: Attachments and articulations of the posterior end of
a typical rib
Fig. 13.7a: Superior view of the first rib (left side)
Fig. 13.6: The superior costotransverse, radiate and intra-
articular ligaments
--- Page 245 ---
THORAX
Thorax
Section 2
Features of First Rib
1 The anterior end is larger and thicker than that in the
other ribs. It is continuous with the first costal
cartilage.
2 The posterior end comprises the following.
a. The head is small and rounded. It articulates with
the body of first thoracic vertebra.
b. The neck is rounded directed laterally, upwards
and backwards.
c. The tubercle is large. It coincides with the angle of
the rib. It articulates with the transverse process
of first thoracic vertebra to form the costo-
transverse joint.
3 The shaft (body) has two surfaces—upper and lower;
and two borders—outer and inner.
a. The upper surface is marked by two shallow
grooves, separated near the inner border by the
scalene tubercle.
b. The lower surface is smooth and has no costal
groove.
c. The outer border is convex, thick behind and thin
in front.
d. The inner border is concave.
Attachments and Relations
1 Anteriorly, the neck is related from medial to lateral
side to:
a. Sympathetic chain
b. Posterior intercostal vein
c. Superior intercostal artery
d. Ventral ramus of first thoracic nerve (Fig. 13.7a).
(Mnemonic—chain pulling a VAN)
2 Superiorly, the neck is related to:
a. The deep cervical vessels
b. The eighth cervical nerve
3 The anterior groove on the superior surface of the
shaft lodges the subclavian vein, and the posterior
groove lodges the subclavian artery and the lower
trunk of the brachial plexus.
4 The structures attached to the upper surface of the
shaft are:
a. The origin of the subclavius muscle at the anterior
end.
b. The attachment of the costoclavicular ligament at
the anterior end behind the subclavius.
c. The insertion of the scalenus anterior on the
scalene tubercle.
d. The insertion of the scalenus medius on the
elongated rough area behind the groove for the
subclavian artery.
5 The lower surface of the shaft is covered by costal
pleura and is related near its outer border to the small
first intercostal nerve which is very small.
6 The outer border gives origin to:
a. The external intercostal muscle, and
b. The upper part of the first digitation of the serratus
anterior, just behind the groove for the subclavian
artery. The thick portion of the outer border is
covered by the scalenus posterior.
7 The inner border gives attachment to the supra-
pleural membrane.
8 The tubercle gives attachment to the lateral
costotransverse ligament.
OSSIFICATION
The first rib ossifies from one primary centre for the
shaft at 8th week of intrauterine life. For the shaft
there are only two secondary centres, one for the
head and the other for the tubercle. These secondary
centres appear at puberty and unite with rest of bone
after 20 years.
Second Rib
Features
The features of the second rib are:
1 The length is twice that of the first rib.
2 The shaft is sharply curved, like that of the first rib.
3 The non-articular part of the tubercle is small.
4 The angle is slight and is situated close to the
tubercle.
5 The shaft has no twist. The outer surface is convex
and faces more upwards than outwards. Near its
middle, it is marked by a large rough tubercle
(Fig. 13.7b). This tubercle is a unique feature of the
second rib. The inner surface of the shaft is smooth
and concave. It faces more downwards than inwards.
There is a short costal groove on the posterior part
of this surface.
Fig. 13.7b: Superior surface of 2nd rib
--- Page 246 ---
BONES AND JOINTS OF THORAX
Thorax
Section 2
The posterior part of the upper border has distinct
outer and inner lips. The part of the outer lip just in
front of the angle is rough.
Attachments
1 The rough tubercle on the outer surface gives origin
to 1½ digitations of the serratus anterior muscle.
2 The rough part of the upper border receives the
insertion of the scalenus posterior.
Tenth Rib
The tenth rib closely resembles a typical rib, but is:
1 Shorter.
2 Has only a single facet on the head, for the body of
the tenth thoracic vertebra.
Eleventh and Twelfth Ribs
Eleventh and twelfth ribs are short. They have pointed
ends. The necks and tubercles are absent. The angle and
costal groove are poorly marked in the eleventh rib and
are absent in the twelfth rib.
Attachments and Relations of the Twelfth Rib
1 The capsular and radiate ligaments are attached to
the head of the rib (Fig. 13.6).
2 The following are attached on the inner surface.
a. The quadratus lumborum is inserted on the lower
part of the medial half to two-thirds of this surface
(Fig. 13.8a).
b. The fascia covering the quadratus lumborum is
also attached to this part of the rib.
c. The internal intercostal muscle is inserted near the
upper border.
d. The costodiaphragmatic recess of the pleura is
related to the medial three-fourths of the costal
surface.
e. The diaphragm takes origin from the anterior end
of this surface.
3 The following are attached to the outer surface.
a. Attachments on the medial half
i. Costotransverse ligament (Fig. 13.8b).
ii. Lumbocostal ligament
iii. Lowest levator costae
iv. Iliocostalis and longissimus parts of
sacrospinalis.
b. Attachments on the lateral half
i. Insertion of serratus posterior inferior
ii. Origin of latissimus dorsi
iii. Origin of external oblique muscle of abdomen.
4 The intercostal muscles are attached to the upper
border.
5 The structures attached to the lower border are:
a. Middle layer of thoracolumbar fascia.
b. Lateral arcuate ligament, at the lateral border of
the quadratus lumborum.
c. Lumbocostal ligament near the head, extending
to the transverse process of first lumbar vertebra.
OSSIFICATION
The eleventh and twelfth ribs ossify from one
primary centre for the shaft and one secondary centre
for the head.
COSTAL CARTILAGES
The costal cartilages represent the unossified anterior
parts of the ribs. They are made up of hyaline cartilage.
They contribute materially to the elasticity of the
thoracic wall.
The medial ends of the costal cartilages of the first
seven ribs are attached directly to the sternum. The
eighth, ninth and tenth cartilages articulate with one
another and form the costal margin. The cartilages of
the eleventh and twelfth ribs are small. Their ends are
free and lie in the muscles of the abdominal wall.
Figs 13.8a and b: The right twelfth rib: (a) Inner surface, and (b) outer surface
--- Page 247 ---
THORAX
Thorax
Section 2
The direction of the costal cartilages is variable. As the
first costal cartilage approaches the sternum, it descends
a little. The second cartilage is horizontal. The third
ascends slightly. The remaining costal cartilages are
angular. They continue the downward course of the rib
for some distance, and then turn upwards to reach either
the sternum or the next higher costal cartilage
(see Fig. 12.1).
Each cartilage has two surfaces—anterior and
posterior; two borders—superior and inferior; and two
ends—lateral and medial.
Attachments
Anterior Surface
1 Anterior surface of the first costal cartilage articulates
with the clavicle and takes part in forming the
sternoclavicular joint. It gives attachment to:
a. The sternoclavicular articular disc (see Chapter 10).
b. The joint capsule of sternoclavicular joint
c. The costoclavicular ligament
d. The subclavius muscle (Fig. 13.7)
2 The second to sixth costal cartilages give origin to
the pectoralis major (Fig. 13.9).
3 The remaining cartilages are covered by and give
partial attachment to some of the flat muscles of the
anterior abdominal wall. The internal oblique muscle
is attached to the, eighth, ninth and tenth cartilages;
and the rectus abdominis to the fifth, sixth and
seventh cartilages.
Posterior Surface
1 The first cartilage gives origin to the sternothyroid
muscle.
2 The second to sixth cartilages receive the insertion
of the sternocostalis (Fig. 13.12).
3 The seventh to twelfth cartilages give attachment to
the transversus abdominis and to the diaphragm.
Superior and Inferior Borders
1 The borders give attachment to the internal
intercostal muscles and the external intercostal
membranes of the spaces concerned (see Fig. 14.1).
2 The seventh to tenth cartilages articulate with one
another at the points of their maximum convexity,
to form synovial joints.
Lateral End
The lateral end of each cartilage forms a primary
cartilaginous joint with the rib concerned.
Medial End
1 The first cartilage forms a primary cartilaginous joint
with the manubrium.
2 The second to seventh cartilages form synovial joints
with the sternum.
3 The eighth and ninth cartilages are connected to the
next higher cartilage by synovial joints.
4 The tenth cartilage is united to ninth cartilage by
fibrous tissue.
5 The ends of the eleventh and twelfth cartilages are
pointed and free.
CLINICAL ANATOMY
• Weakest area of rib is the region of its angle. This
is the commonest site of fracture.
• Cervical rib occurs in 0.5% of persons. It may
articulate with first rib or may have a free end. It
may cause pressure on lower trunk of brachial
plexus, resulting in paraesthesia along the medial
border of forearm and wasting of intrinsic muscles
of hand (see Fig. 12.14). It may also cause pressure
on the subclavian artery.
• In rickets, there is inadequate mineralisation of
bone matrix at the growth plates due to increased
bone resorption. Due to deposition of unminera-
lised matrix, there is widening of the wrist and
rachitic rosary, i.e. prominent costochondral
junctions in thoracic cage.
STERNUM
The sternum is a flat bone, forming the anterior median
part of the thoracic skeleton. In shape, it resembles a
short sword. The upper part, corresponding to the
Fig. 13.9: The sternum: Anterior aspect, with muscle attachment
--- Page 248 ---
BONES AND JOINTS OF THORAX
Thorax
Section 2
handle, is called the manubrium. The middle part,
resembling the blade is called the body. The lowest
tapering part forming the point of the sword is the
xiphoid process or xiphisternum.
The sternum is about 17 cm long. It is longer in males
than in females (Figs 13.9 to 13.11).
Manubrium
The manubrium is quadrilateral in shape. It is the
thickest and strongest part of the sternum. It has two
surfaces—anterior and posterior; and four borders—
superior, inferior, and two lateral.
The anterior surface is convex from side-to-side and
concave from above downwards (Fig. 13.10).
The posterior surface is concave and forms the anterior
boundary of the superior mediastinum.
The superior border is thick, rounded and concave. It
is marked by the suprasternal notch or jugular notch
or interclavicular notch in the median part, and by the
clavicular notch on each side. The clavicular notch
articulates with the medial end of the clavicle to form
the sternoclavicular joint (Fig. 13.11).
The inferior border forms a secondary cartilaginous
joint with the body of the sternum. The manubrium
makes a slight angle with the body, convex forwards,
called the sternal angle of Louis. Events at the sternal
angle:
i. Formation of cardiac plexus
ii. Upper limit of base of heart
iii. Arch of aorta starts here as continuation of
ascending aorta.
iv. Arch of aorta ends here to continue as descending
thoracic aorta.
v. Trachea divides into 2 branches.
Each lateral border forms a primary cartilaginous joint
with the first costal cartilage, and present a demifacet
for synovial articulation with the upper part of the
second costal cartilage.
Attachments
1 The anterior surface gives origin on either side to:
a. The pectoralis major.
b. The sternal head of the sternocleidomastoid
(Fig. 13.9).
2 The posterior surface gives origin to:
a. The sternohyoid in upper part (Fig. 13.12).
b. The sternothyroid in lower part.
c. The lower half of this surface is related to the arch
of the aorta. The upper half is related to the left
brachiocephalic vein, the brachiocephalic artery,
the left common carotid artery and the left sub-
clavian artery. The lateral portions of the surface
are related to the corresponding lung and pleura.
3 The suprasternal notch gives attachment to the lower
fibres of the interclavicular ligament, and to the two
subdivisions of the investing layer of cervical fascia.
4 The margins of each clavicular notch give attachment
to the capsule of the corresponding sternoclavicular
joint (see Chapter 10).
Fig. 13.11: The sternum: Lateral aspect
Fig. 13.10: The sternum: Anterior aspect
--- Page 249 ---
THORAX
Thorax
Section 2
Body of the Sternum
The body is longer, narrower and thinner than the
manubrium. It is widest close to its lower end opposite
the articulation with the fifth costal cartilage. It has two
surfaces—anterior and posterior; two lateral borders;
and two ends—upper and lower.
1 The anterior surface is nearly flat and directed
forwards and slightly upwards. It is marked by three
ill-defined transverse ridges, indicating the lines of
fusion of the four small segments called sternebrae.
2 The posterior surface is slightly concave and is marked
by less distinct transverse lines.
3 The lateral borders form synovial joints with the
lower part of the second costal cartilage, the third to
sixth costal cartilages, and the upper half of the
seventh costal cartilage (Fig. 13.11).
4 The upper end forms a secondary cartilaginous joint
with the manubrium at the sternal angle.
5 The lower end is narrow and forms a primary
cartilaginous joint with the xiphisternum.
Attachments
1 The anterior surface gives origin on either side to
the pectoralis major muscle (Fig. 13.9).
2 The lower part of the posterior surface gives origin
on either side to the sternocostalis muscle.
3 On the right side of the median plane, the posterior
surface is related to the anterior border of the right lung
and pleura. On the left side, the upper two pieces of
the body are related to the left lung and pleura, and
the lower two pieces to the pericardium (Fig. 13.12).
4 Between the facets for articulation with the costal
cartilages, the lateral borders provide attachment to
the external intercostal membranes and to the
internal intercostal muscles (see Fig. 14.1).
Xiphoid Process
The xiphoid process is the smallest part of the sternum.
It is at first cartilaginous, but in the adult it becomes
ossified near its upper end. It varies greatly in shape
and may be bifid or perforated. It lies in the floor of the
epigastric fossa (Fig. 13.10).
Attachments
1 The anterior surface provides insertion to the medial
fibres of the rectus abdominis, and to the
aponeuroses of the external and internal oblique
muscles of the abdomen.
2 The posterior surface gives origin to the diaphragm.
It is related to the anterior surface of the liver.
3 The lateral borders of the xiphoid process give
attachment to the aponeuroses of the internal oblique
and transversus abdominis muscles.
4 The upper end forms a primary cartilaginous joint
with the body of the sternum.
5 The lower end affords attachment to the linea alba.
DEVELOPMENT AND OSSIFICATION
The sternum develops by fusion of two sternal plates
formed on either side of the midline. The fusion of
the two plates takes place in a craniocaudal direction.
Manubrium is ossified from 2 centers appearing
in 5th month.
First and second sternebrae ossify from one centre
appearing in 5th month. Third and fourth sternebrae
ossify from paired centres which appear in 5th and
6th months. These fuse with each other from below
upwards during puberty. Fusion is completed by 25
years of age.
The manubriosternal joint is a secondary
cartilaginous joint and usually persists throughout
life.
The centre for the xiphoid process appears during
the third year or later. It fuses with the body at about
40 years (Figs 13.13a and b).
CLINICAL ANATOMY
• Bone marrow for examination is usually obtained
by manubriosternal puncture (Fig. 13.14). It is done
in its upper half to prevent injury to arch of aorta
which lies behind its lower half.
• The slight movements that take place at the
manubriosternal joint are essential for movements
of the ribs.
• In the anomaly called ‘funnel chest’, the sternum
is depressed (Fig. 13.15a).
Fig. 13.12: Attachments on the posterior surface of the sternum
--- Page 250 ---
BONES AND JOINTS OF THORAX
Thorax
Section 2
of elastic costal cartilages. Indirect violence may
lead to fracture of sternum.
• Non-fusion of the sternal plates causes ectopia
cordis, where the heart lies uncovered on the
surface. Partial fusion of the plates may lead to
the formation of sternal foramina, bifid xiphoid
process, etc. (Fig. 13.9).
VERTEBRAL COLUMN
Vertebral Column as a Whole
The vertebral column is also called the spine, the spinal
column, or back bone. It is the central axis of the body.
It supports the body weight and transmits it to the
ground through the lower limbs.
The vertebral column is made up of 33 vertebrae:
Seven cervical, twelve thoracic, five lumbar, five sacral
and four coccygeal. In the thoracic, lumbar and sacral
regions, the number of vertebrae corresponds to the
number of spinal nerves, each nerve lying below the
corresponding vertebra. In the cervical region, there are
eight nerves, the upper seven lying above the
corresponding vertebrae and the eighth below the
seventh vertebra. In the coccygeal region, there is only
one coccygeal nerve.
Sometimes the vertebrae are also grouped according
to their mobility. The movable or true vertebrae include
the seven cervical, twelve thoracic and five lumbar
vertebrae, making a total of 24. Twelve thoracic verte-
brae have ribs attached to them. The fixed vertebrae
include those of the sacrum and coccyx.
The length of the spine is about 70 cm in males and
about 60 cm in females. The intervertebral discs
contribute one-fifth of the length of the vertebral
column.
As a result of variations in the width of the vertebrae,
the vertebral column can be said to be made up of four
pyramids (Fig. 13.16a). This arrangement has a
functional bearing. The narrowing of the vertebral
column at the level of the disc between fourth thoracic
and fifth thoracic vertebrae is partly compensated by
the transmission of weight to the lower thoracic region
through the sternum and ribs.
Curvatures
In Sagittal Plane
1 Primary curves are present at birth due to the shape
of the vertebral bodies. The primary curves are
thoracic and sacral, both of which are concave
forwards.
2 Secondary curves are postural and are mainly due to
the shape of the intervertebral disc. The secondary
or compensatory curves are cervical and lumbar,
Figs 13.13a and b: Ossification of sternum
Figs 13.15a and b: (a) Funnel chest, and (b) pigeon chest
Fig. 13.14: Sternal puncture for bone marrow biopsy
• In another anomaly called ‘pigeon chest’, there is
forward projection of the sternum like the keel of
a boat, and flattening of the chest wall on either
side (Fig. 13.15b).
• For cardiac surgery, the manubrium and/or body
of sternum need to be splitted in midline and the
incision is closed with stainless steel wires.
• Sternum is protected from injury by attachment
--- Page 251 ---
THORAX
Thorax
Section 2
both of which are convex forwards. The cervical
curve appears during 4 to 5 months after birth when
the infant starts supporting its head: The lumbar
curve appears during 12 to 18 months when the child
assumes the upright posture (Figs 13.16b and c).
In Coronal Plane (Lateral Curve)
There is slight lateral curve in the thoracic region with
its concavity towards the left. It is possible due to the
greater use of the right upper limb and the pressure of
the aorta.
The curvatures add to the elasticity of the spine, and
the number of curves gives it a higher resistance to
weight than would be afforded by a single curve.
Parts of a Typical Vertebra
A typical vertebra is made up of the following parts:
1 The body lies anteriorly. It is shaped like a short
cylinder, being rounded from side-to-side and
having flat upper and lower surfaces that are
attached to those of adjoining vertebrae by
intervertebral discs (Fig. 13.17).
2 The pedicles, right and left, are short rounded bars
that project backwards, and somewhat laterally, from
the posterior aspect of the body.
3 Each pedicle is continuous, posteromedially, with
a vertical plate of bone called the lamina. The
laminae of the two sides pass backwards and
medially to meet in the midline. The pedicles and
laminae together constitute the vertebral or neural
arch.
4 Bounded anteriorly by the posterior aspect of the
body, on the sides by the pedicles, and behind by
the lamina, there is a large vertebral foramen.
Each vertebral foramen forms a short segment of the
vertebral canal that runs through the whole length
of the vertebral column and lodges the spinal cord.
5 Passing backwards and usually downwards from the
junction of the two laminae, there is the spine or
spinous process (Fig. 13.18).
6 Passing laterally and usually somewhat downwards
from the junction of each pedicle and the corres-
ponding lamina, there is a transverse process. The
spinous and transverse processes serve as levers for
muscles acting on the vertebral column.
From a morphological point of view, the transverse
processes are made up of two elements—the
transverse element and the costal element. In the
thoracic region, the two elements remain separate,
and the costal elements form the ribs. In the rest of the
vertebral column, the derivatives of costal element are
different from those derived from transverse element.
This is shown in Table 13.1.
7 Projecting upwards from the junction of the pedicle
and the lamina, there is on either side, a superior
articular process; and projecting downwards there is
an inferior articular process (Fig. 13.19). Each process
Fig. 13.17: Typical thoracic vertebra—superior aspect
Figs 13.16a to c: (a) Scheme to show that the vertebral column is divisible into a number of pyramidal segments, (b) primary
curves, and (c) secondary curves
--- Page 252 ---
BONES AND JOINTS OF THORAX
Thorax
Section 2
the intervertebral foramina which give passage to the
dorsal and ventral rami of the spinal nerves emerging
from the spinal cord.
Thoracic Vertebrae
Identification
The thoracic vertebrae are identified by the presence
of costal facets on the sides of the vertebral bodies.
The costal facets may be two or only one on each side
(Fig. 13.18).
There are 12 thoracic vertebrae, out of which the
second to eighth are typical, and the remaining five
(first, ninth, tenth, eleventh and twelfth) are
atypical.
Table 13.1: The transverse and costal elements of the vertebrae
Region
Transverse element
Costal element (Fig. 13.20)
Thoracic
Forms the descriptive transverse process
Forms the rib
Cervical
Fuses with the costal element and forms
1. Anterior wall of foramen transversarium,
the medial part of the posterior wall of the
2. Anterior tubercle,
foramen transversarium
3. Costotransverse bar,
4. Posterior tubercle, and
5. Lateral part of the posterior wall of the foramen
Lumbar
Forms the accessory process
Forms the real (descriptive) transverse process
Sacral
Fuses with the costal element to form
Forms the anterior part of the lateral mass
the posterior part of the lateral mass
Fig. 13.20: Costal elements in various vertebrae
Fig. 13.19: Typical thoracic vertebra—posterior aspect
Fig. 13.18: Typical thoracic vertebra (5th)—lateral view
bears a smooth articular facet: The superior facet of
one vertebra articulates with the inferior facet of the
vertebra above it.
8 The pedicle is much narrower in vertical diameter
than the body and is attached nearer its upper border.
As a result, there is a large inferior vertebral notch
below the pedicle. Above the pedicle, there is a much
shallower superior vertebral notch. The superior and
inferior notches of adjoining vertebrae join to form
--- Page 253 ---
THORAX
Thorax
Section 2
Typical Thoracic Vertebrae
1 The body is heart-shaped with roughly the same
measurements from side-to-side and antero-
posteriorly. On each side, it bears two costal demi-
facets. The superior costal demifacet is larger and placed
on the upper border of the body near the pedicle. It
articulates with the head of the numerically
corresponding rib. The inferior costal demifacet is
smaller and placed on the lower border in front of
the inferior vertebral notch. It articulates with the
next lower rib (Fig. 13.18).
2 The vertebral foramen is comparatively small and
circular.
3 The vertebral arch shows:
a. The pedicles are directed straight backwards. The
superior vertebral notch is shallow, while the
inferior vertebral notch is deep and conspicuous.
b. The laminae overlap each other from above.
c. The superior articular processes project upwards
from the junction of the pedicles and laminae. The
articular facets are flat and are directed backwards.
This direction permits rotatory movements of the
spine.
d. The inferior articular processes are fused to the laminae.
Their articular facets are directed forwards.
e. The transverse processes are large, and are directed
laterally and backwards from the junction of the
pedicles and laminae. The anterior surface of each
process bears a facet near its tip, for articulation
with the tubercle of the corresponding rib. In the
upper six vertebrae, the costal facets on the
transverse processes are concave, and face
forwards and laterally. In lower four, the facets
are flat and face upwards, laterally and slightly
forwards (Fig. 13.24). In the last two vertebrae, the
articular facets are absent (see costotransverse
joints below).
f. The spine is long, and is directed downwards and
backwards. The fifth to ninth spines are the longest,
more vertical and overlap each other. The upper
and lower spines are less oblique in direction.
Attachments
1 The upper and lower borders of the body give
attachment, in front and behind respectively to the
anterior and posterior longitudinal ligaments (Fig. 13.5).
2 The upper borders and lower parts of the anterior
surfaces of the laminae provide attachment to the
ligamenta flava.
3 The transverse process gives attachment to:
a. The lateral costotransverse ligament at the tip.
b. The superior costotransverse ligament along the
lower border.
c. The inferior costotransverse ligament along the
anterior surface.
d. The intertransverse ligaments and muscles to
upper and lower borders.
e. The levator costae on the posterior surface.
4 The spines give attachment to the supraspinous and
interspinous ligaments. They also give attachment to
several muscles including the trapezius, the rhom-
boids, the latissimus dorsi, the serratus posterior
superior and the serratus posterior inferior, and
many deep muscles of the back.
First Thoracic Vertebra
1 The body of this vertebra resembles that of a cervical
vertebra. It is broad and not heart-shaped. Its upper
surface is lipped laterally and bevelled anteriorly.
The superior costal facet on the body is complete
(Fig. 13.21). It articulates with the head of the first
rib. The inferior costal facet is a ‘demifacet’ for the
second rib.
2 The spine is thick, long and nearly horizontal.
Fig. 13.21: Features of atypical thoracic vertebrae
--- Page 254 ---
BONES AND JOINTS OF THORAX
Thorax
Section 2
3 The superior vertebral notches are well marked, as
in cervical vertebrae.
4 Facet on transverse process is concave on T1–T6
vertebrae.
Ninth Thoracic Vertebra
The ninth thoracic vertebra resembles a typical thoracic
vertebra except that the body has only the superior
costal demifacets. The inferior costal facets are absent
(Fig. 13.21). Facet on transverse process is flat on T7–
T10 vertebrae.
Tenth Thoracic Vertebra
The tenth thoracic vertebra resembles a typical thoracic
vertebra except that the body has a single complete
superior costal facet on each side, extending onto the
root of the pedicle (Fig. 13.21).
Eleventh Thoracic Vertebra
1 The body has a single large costal facet on each side,
extending onto the upper part of the pedicle
(Fig. 13.21).
2 The transverse process is small, and has no articular
facet.
Sometimes it is difficult to differentiate between
tenth and eleventh thoracic vertebrae.
Twelfth Thoracic Vertebra
1 The shapes of the body, pedicles, transverse processes
and spine are similar to those of a lumbar vertebra.
However, the body bears a single costal facet on each
side, which lies more on the lower part of the pedicle
than on the body.
2 The transverse process is small and has no facet, but
has superior, inferior and lateral tubercles (Fig. 13.21).
3 The inferior articular facets are lumbar in type. These
are everted and are directed laterally, but the superior
articular facets are thoracic in type.
OSSIFICATION
The ossifications of typical vertebra and a thoracic
vertebra are similar. It ossifies in cartilage from three
primary and five secondary centres.
The three primary centres—one for the centrum
and one for each half of the neural arch, appear
during eighth to ninth weeks of fetal life.
At birth, the vertebra consists of three parts, the
centrum and two halves of the neural arch. The two
halves of the neural arch fuse posteriorly during the
first year of life. The neural arch is joined with the
centrum by the neurocentral synchondrosis. Bony
fusion occurs here during the third to sixth years of
life.
Five secondary centres—one for the upper surface
and one for the lower surface of the body, one for
each transverse process, and one for the spine appear
at about the 15th year and fuse with the rest of the
vertebra at about the 25th year (Fig. 13.22).
CLINICAL ANATOMY
• Failure of fusion of the two halves of the neural
arch results in ‘spina bifida’. Sometimes the body
ossifies from two primary centres, and if one
centre fails to develop, one half, right or left of
the body is missing. This results in a hemivertebra
and lateral bend in the vertebral column or
scoliosis.
• In young adults, the discs are very strong.
However, after the second decade of life,
degenerative changes set in resulting in weakness
of the annulus fibrosus. When such a disc is
subjected to strain, the annulus fibrosus may
rupture leading to prolapse of the nucleus
pulposus. This is commonly referred to as disc
prolapse. It may occur even after a minor strain. In
addition to prolapse of the nucleus pulposus,
internal derangements of the disc may also take
place.
• Disc prolapse is usually posterolateral. The
prolapsed nucleus pulposus presses upon adjacent
nerve roots and gives rise to pain that radiates
along the distribution of the nerve. Such pain
along the course of the sciatic nerve is called
sciatica. Motor effects, with loss of power and
reflexes, may follow. Disc prolapse occurs most
frequently in the lower lumbar region (Fig. 13.23).
It is also common in the lower cervical region from
fifth to seventh cervical vertebrae.
Fig. 13.22: Ossification of a thoracic vertebra
--- Page 255 ---
THORAX
Thorax
Section 2
Fig. 13.24: A section through the costotransverse joints from the
third to the ninth inclusive. Contrast the concave facets on the
upper with the flattened facets on the lower transverse processes
Competency achievement: The student should be able to:
AN 21.8 Describe and demonstrate type, articular surfaces and
movements of manubriosternal, costovertebral, costotransverse and
xiphisternal joints.3
JOINTS OF THORAX
Manubriosternal Joint
Manubriosternal joint is a secondary cartilaginous joint.
It permits slight movements of the body of the sternum
on the manubrium during respiration.
Costovertebral Joints
The head of a typical rib articulates with its own
vertebra, and also with the body of the next higher
vertebra, to form two plane synovial cavities separated
by an intra-articular ligament (Fig. 13.6). This ligament
is attached to the ridge on the head of the rib and to the
intervertebral disc.
Other ligaments of the joint include a capsular
ligament and a triradiate ligament. The upper ligament
is attached to vertebra above. The lower ligament is
attached to vertebra below. The middle band of the
triradiate ligament forms the hypochordal bow
(Fig. 13.5), uniting the joints of the two sides.
Competency achievement: The student should be able to:
AN 21.10 Describe costochondral and interchondral joints.4
Costotransverse Joints
The tubercle of a typical rib articulates with the facet
on anterior surface of transverse process of the
corresponding vertebra to form a synovial joint.
The capsular ligament is strengthened by three
costotransverse ligaments. The superior costotransverse
ligament has two laminae which extend from the crest
on the neck of the rib to the transverse process of the
vertebra above. The inferior costotransverse ligament
passes from the posterior surface of the neck to the
transverse process of its own vertebra. The lateral costo-
transverse ligament connects the lateral non-articular
part of the tubercle to the tip of the transverse process
of its own vertebra.
The articular facets on the tubercles of the upper six
ribs are convex, and permit rotation of the neck of the
rib for pump-handle movements (Fig. 13.24). Rotation of
rib-neck backwards causes elevation of second to sixth
ribs with moving forwards and upwards of the sternum.
This increases the anteroposterior diameter of the thorax
(Fig. 13.25).
The articular surfaces of the seventh to tenth ribs
are flat, permitting up and down gliding movements
or bucket-handle movements of the lower ribs. When
the neck of seventh to tenth ribs moves upwards,
backwards and medially, the result is increase in
infrasternal angle. This causes increase in transverse
diameter of thorax (Fig. 13.26).
For explanation of the terms ‘pump-handle’ and
‘bucket-handle’ movements, see ‘Respiratory Move-
ments’.
Fig. 13.23: Disc prolapse causing pressure on the spinal
nerve
--- Page 256 ---
BONES AND JOINTS OF THORAX
Thorax
Section 2
Costochondral Joints
Each rib is continuous anteriorly with its cartilage, to
form a primary cartilaginous joint. No movements are
permitted at these joints.
Chondrosternal Joints
The first chondrosternal joint is a primary cartilaginous
joint, it does not permit any movement. This helps in
the stability of the shoulder girdle and of the upper
limb.
The second to seventh costal cartilages articulate with
the sternum by synovial joints. Each joint has a single
cavity except in the second joint where the cavity is
divided in two parts. The joints are held together by
the capsular and radiate ligaments.
Interchondral Joints
The fifth to ninth costal cartilages articulate with one
another by synovial joints. The tenth cartilage is united
to the ninth by fibrous tissue.
The movements taking place at the various joints
described above are considered under ‘Respiratory
Movements’.
Intervertebral Joints
Adjoining vertebrae (Th 5 and Th 6) are connected to
each other at three joints. There is a median joint
between the vertebral bodies, and two joints—one on
the right side and one on the left side—between the
articular processes.
The joints between the articular processes are plane
synovial joints.
The joint between the vertebral bodies is a symphysis
(secondary cartilaginous joint). The surfaces of the
vertebral bodies are lined by thin layers of hyaline
cartilage. Between these layers of hyaline cartilage,
there is a thick plate of fibrocartilage which is called
the intervertebral disc.
Intervertebral Discs
These are fibrocartilaginous discs which intervene
between the bodies of adjacent vertebrae, and bind them
together. Their shape corresponds to that of the vertebral
bodies between which they are placed. The thickness of
the disc varies in different regions of the vertebral
column, and in different parts of the same disc. In the
cervical and lumbar regions, the discs are thicker in front
than behind, while in the thoracic region they are of
uniform thickness. The discs are thinnest in the upper
thoracic region, and thickest in the lumbar region.
The discs contribute about one-fifth of the length of
the vertebral column. The contribution is greater in the
cervical and lumbar regions than in the thoracic region.
Each disc is made up of the following two parts.
1 The nucleus pulposus is the central part of the disc. It
is soft and gelatinous at birth. It is kept under tension
and acts as a hydraulic shock absorber. With
advancing age, the elasticity of the disc is much
reduced (Figs 13.27a and c).
2 The annulus fibrosus forms the peripheral part of the
disc. It is made up of a narrower outer zone of colla-
genous fibres and a wider inner zone of fibrocartilage.
The fibres form laminae that are arranged in the form
of incomplete rings. The rings are connected by strong
fibrous bands. The outer collagenous fibres blend
Fig. 13.25: The axes of movement (AB and CD) of a
vertebrosternal rib. The interrupted lines indicate the position of
the rib in inspiration
Fig. 13.26: The axis of movement (AB) of a vertebrochondral
rib. The interrupted lines indicate the position of the rib in
inspiration
--- Page 257 ---
THORAX
Thorax
Section 2
with the anterior and posterior longitudinal liga-
ments (Figs 13.27a to c).
Functions
1 The intervertebral discs give shape to the vertebral
column.
2 They act as a remarkable series of shock absorbers
or buffers.
3 Because of their elasticity, they allow slight
movement of vertebral bodies on each other, more
so in the cervical and lumbar regions. When the slight
movements at individual discs are added together,
they become considerable.
Ligaments Connecting Adjacent Vertebrae
Apart from the intervertebral discs and the capsules
around the joints between the articular processes,
adjacent vertebrae are connected by several ligaments
which are as follows.
1 The anterior longitudinal ligament passes from the
anterior surface of the body of one vertebra to
another. Its upper end reaches the basilar part of the
occipital bone (Fig. 13.5).
2 The posterior longitudinal ligament is present on the
posterior surface of the vertebral bodies within the
vertebral canal. Its upper end reaches the body of
the axis vertebra (C2) beyond which it is continuous
with the membrana tectoria (Fig. 13.5).
3 The intertransverse ligaments connect adjacent
transverse processes.
4 The interspinous ligaments connect adjacent spines.
5 The supraspinous ligaments connect the tips of the
spines of vertebrae from the seventh cervical to the
sacrum. In the cervical region, they are replaced by
the ligamentum nuchae.
6 The ligamenta flava (singular = ligamentum flavum)
connect the laminae of adjacent vertebrae. They are
made up mainly of elastic tissue.
Movements of the Vertebral Column
Movements between adjacent vertebrae occur
simultaneously at all the joints connecting them.
Movement between any two vertebrae is slight.
However, when the movements between several
vertebrae are added together the total range of
movement becomes considerable. The movements are
those of flexion, extension, lateral flexion and a certain
amount of rotation. The range of movement differs in
different parts of the vertebral column. This is
influenced by the thickness and flexibility of the
intervertebral discs and by the orientation of the
articular facets.
Flexion and extension occur freely in the cervical and
lumbar regions, but not in the thoracic region. Rotation
is free in the thoracic region, and restricted in the lumbar
and cervical regions.
Competency achievement: The student should be able to:
AN 21.9 Describe and demonstrate mechanics and types of
respiration.5
RESPIRATORY MOVEMENTS
Introduction
The lungs expand during inspiration and retract during
expiration. These movements are governed by the
following two factors.
1 Alterations in the capacity of the thorax are brought
about by movements of the thoracic wall. Increase
in volume of the thoracic cavity creates a negative
intrathoracic pressure which sucks air into the lungs.
Movements of the thoracic wall occur chiefly at the
costovertebral and manubriosternal joints.
2 Elastic recoil of the pulmonary alveoli and of the
thoracic wall expels air from the lungs during expira-
tion.
Principles of Movements
1 Each rib may be regarded as a lever, the fulcrum of
which lies just lateral to the tubercle. Because of the
disproportion in the length of the two arms of the
lever, the slight movements at the vertebral end of
the rib are greatly magnified at the anterior end
(Fig. 13.28).
Figs 13.27a to c: Structure of an intervertebral disc. (a) Superior
view, (b) arrangement of laminae, and (c) vertical section
--- Page 258 ---
BONES AND JOINTS OF THORAX
Thorax
Section 2
the position of the smaller upper rib which pushes
sternum forwards. This also increases the transverse
diameter of the thorax (Fig. 13.30).
5 Vertical diameter is increased by the ‘piston
movements’ of the thoracoabdominal diaphragm
(Fig. 13.31).
Fig. 13.30: Scheme showing how ‘bucket-handle’ movements
of the vertebrochondral ribs bring about an increase in the
transverse diameter of the thorax
Fig. 13.31: Scheme showing how piston movements of
thoracoabdominal diaphragm bring about an increase in the ver-
tical diameter of the thorax
Fig. 13.28: Diagram comparing a rib to a lever
Fig. 13.29: Diagram showing how ‘pump-handle’ movements
of the sternum bring about an increase in the anteroposterior
diameter of the thorax
2 The anterior end of the rib is lower than the posterior
end. Therefore, during elevation of the rib, the
anterior end also moves forwards. This occurs mostly
in the vertebrosternal ribs. Along with the up and
down movements of the second to sixth ribs, the
body of the sternum also moves up and down called
pump-handle movements (Fig. 13.29). In this way, the
anteroposterior diameter of the thorax is increased.
3 The middle of the shaft of the rib lies at a lower level
than the plane passing through the two ends.
Therefore, during elevation of the rib, the shaft also
moves outwards. This causes increase in the
transverse diameter of the thorax.
Such movements occur in the vertebrochondral ribs,
and are called bucket-handle movements.
4 The thorax resembles a cone, tapering upwards. As
a result, each rib is longer than the next higher rib.
On elevation, the larger lower rib comes to occupy
--- Page 259 ---
THORAX
Thorax
Section 2
Summary of the Factors Producing
Increase in Diameters of the Thorax
The anteroposterior diameter is increased:
1 Mainly by the pump-handle movements of the
sternum brought about by elevation of the vertebro-
sternal second to sixth ribs.
2 Partly by elevation of the seventh to tenth vertebro-
chondral ribs.
The transverse diameter is increased:
1 Mainly by the bucket-handle movements of the
seventh to tenth vertebrochondral ribs.
2 Partly by elevation of the second to sixth verte-
brosternal ribs.
The vertical diameter is increased by descent of the
diaphragm as it contracts. This is called piston mecha-
nism. During inspiration, the diaphragm contracts and
it comes down by 2 cm. It is aided by relaxation of
muscles of anterior abdominal wall. During expiration,
abdominal muscles contract and diaphragm is pushed
upwards. It facilitates in inspiration of at least 400 ml
of air during each contraction.
In females, respiration is thoracoabdominal and in
males it is abdominothoracic type.
Respiratory Muscles
For inspiration—diaphragm, external intercostal
muscle and interchondral part of internal intercostal
of contralateral side.
 Deep inspiration—erector spinae, scalene muscles,
pectoral muscles.
For expiration—passive process.
Forced expiration—muscles of anterior abdominal
wall.
Respiratory Movements during
Different Types of Breathing
Inspiration
1 Quiet inspiration
a. The anteroposterior diameter of the thorax is
increased by elevation of the second to sixth ribs.
The first rib remains fixed.
b. The transverse diameter is increased by elevation
of the seventh to tenth ribs.
c. The vertical diameter is increased by descent of
the diaphragm.
2 Deep inspiration
a. Movements during quiet inspiration are increased.
b. The first rib is elevated directly by the scaleni, and
indirectly by the sternocleidomastoid.
c. The concavity of the thoracic spine is reduced by
the erector spinae.
3 Forced inspiration
a. All the movements described are exaggerated.
b. The scapulae are elevated and fixed by the
trapezius, the levator scapulae and the rhomboids,
so that the serratus anterior and the pectoralis
minor muscles may act on the ribs.
c. The action of the erector spinae is appreciably
increased.
Expiration
1 Quiet expiration: The air is expelled mainly by the
elastic recoil of the chest wall and pulmonary alveoli,
and partly by the tone of the abdominal muscles.
2 Deep and forced expiration: Deep and forced expiration
is brought about by strong contraction of the
abdominal muscles and of the latissimus dorsi.
CLINICAL ANATOMY
• In dyspnoea or difficulty in breathing, the patients
are most comfortable on sitting up, leaning
forwards and fixing the arms. In the sitting posture,
the position of diaphragm is the lowest allowing
maximum ventilation. Fixation of the arms fixes the
scapulae, so that the serratus anterior and pectoralis
minor may act on the ribs to good advantage.
• The height of the diaphragm in the thorax is
variable according to the position of the body and
tone of the abdominal muscles. It is highest on
lying supine, so the patient is extremely
uncomfortable, as he/she needs to exert
immensely for inspiration. The diaphragm is
lowest while sitting. The patient is quite
comfortable as the effort required for inspiration
is the least.
The diaphragm is midway in position while
standing, but the patient is too ill or exhausted to
stand. So dyspnoeic patients feel comfortable
while sitting (Figs 13.32a to c).
• Most prominent role in respiration is played by
diaphragm.
• Respiration occurs in two phases:
Inspiration—active phase of 1 second
Expiration—passive phase of 3 second.
• In young children (up to 2 years of age), the
thoracic cavity is almost circular in cross-section
so the scope for anteroposterior or side-to-side
expansion is limited. The type of respiration in
children is abdominal.
• In women of advanced stage of pregnancy,
descent of diaphragm is limited, so the type of
respiration in them is mainly thoracic.
--- Page 260 ---
BONES AND JOINTS OF THORAX
Thorax
Section 2
Mnemonics
Structures in costal groove: VAN from above
downwards
Posterior intercostal vein
Posterior intercostal artery
Intercostal nerve
Structures on neck of 1st rib: sympathetic trunk and
VAN from medial to lateral side
Posterior intercostal vein
Superior intercostal artery
1st thoracic nerve
Vertebrae: Recognising a Thoracic from Lumbar
• Presence of costal facets on the sides of the body
and transverse process
• Shape of the vertebral body
– Thoracic is heart-shaped body (since your heart
is in your thorax).
– Lumbar is kidney-/bean-shaped body (since
kidneys are in lumbar area)
• Spine is long and oblique
FACTS TO REMEMBER
• Sternum forms joints with its own parts:
– One manubriosternal joint—secondary carti-
laginous.
– Three joints between sternebrae—primary
cartilaginous.
– One joint between sternum and xiphoid
process—primary cartilaginous.
– Sternum forms two joints with clavicles of the
two sides—saddle type of synovial joint.
– It articulates with 1st–7th costal cartilages on
each side forming a total of 14 joints—all plane
synovial joints except 1st chondrosternal which
is synchondrosis.
• A typical thoracic vertebra forms following joints:
– Body of one vertebrae with body of vertebra
above and body of vertebra below—secondary
cartilaginous joint (2 joints).
– Lower larger part of head of corresponding rib
for the demifacet along the upper border of the
body on each side (2 cavities, 1 joint).
– Upper smaller part of head of a lower rib for
the demifacet along the lower border of the body
on each side (2 cavities, 1 joint).
– Superior articular processes on each side with
the inferior articular processes of the vertebra
above (2 joints).
– Inferior articular processes on each side with the
superior articular processes of the vertebra
below (2 joints).
– Transverse process of the vertebra with the
articular part of the tubercle of the rib on each
side (2 joints).
– Body of the vertebra with the pedicle of the
vertebra on each side—primary cartilaginous
joints (2 joints).
Thus there are 12 joints which a typical thoracic
vertebra makes.
2 secondary cartilaginous joints
2 primary cartilaginous joints
8 plane joints of synovial variety
• The ribs are arched bones. Joints formed by a typical
rib are:
– Posterior end or head of a typical rib articulates
with two adjacent vertebrae, corresponding one
and one above it and the intervening
intervertebral disc.
– The articular part of the tubercle articulates with
transverse process of corresponding vertebra.
– The anterior part of the shaft of rib continues as
the costal cartilage. It is primary cartilaginous joint.
– A costal cartilage forms plane synovial joint with
the side of sternum.
• Respiratory movements produced by movements
of thoracoabdominal diaphragm are called
‘abdominal respiration’.
• Respiratory movements produced by movements
of intercostal muscles are called ‘thoracic respiration’.
Figs 13.32a to c: Position of diaphragm: (a) Sitting, (b) stand-
ing, and (c) lying down
--- Page 261 ---
THORAX
Thorax
Section 2
1. Transverse diameter of thoracic cage increases by:
a. Pump-handle movement of ribs
b. Bucket-handle movement of ribs
c. Caliper movement of ribs
d. Contraction of diaphragm
2. Anteroposterior diameter of thorax increases by:
a. Pump-handle movement of ribs
b. Bucket-handle movement of ribs
c. Contraction of diaphragm
d. Relaxation of diaphragm
3. Which one of the following joints is a primary
cartilaginous joint?
a. Costovertebral
b. Costotransverse
c. First costochondral
d. Manubriosternal
4. Which of the following ribs articulates with one
vertebra only?
a. First
b. Second
c. Third
d. Fourth
5. The tubercle of a typical rib articulates with the facet
on the transverse process of:
a. Vertebra above
b. Vertebra below
c. Its own vertebra
d. All of the above
6. Which of the following ribs articulates with
transverse process of a thoracic vertebra?
a. Eleventh
b. Twelfth
c. First
d. None of the above
7. The most characteristic feature of the thoracic
vertebrae is:
a. The body is heart-shaped
b. The spine is oblique
c. The body has costal facets
d. Vertebral foramen is small and circular
1. Enumerate the parts of a rib and the joints formed
by a typical rib.
2. Name the structures related to the neck of first rib.
3. Enumerate the joints formed by the manubrium,
and by sternum with the costal cartilages.
4. Which area of sternum is related to the pericardium?
5. When do the secondary curvatures appear in the
vertebral column?
6. Name the joints formed by typical thoracic vertebra.
7. Give an account of the various respiratory
movements. Name the muscles responsible for
inspiratory and expiratary movements.
CLINICOANATOMICAL PROBLEM
During ‘Pranayama’, deep regulated and smooth
breathing occurs.
• Which diameters increase during deep breathing?
Ans: The anteroposterior diameter increases by
‘pump-handle movement’ of the sternum.
The transverse diameter increases by the ‘bucket-
handle movement’ of the 7–10 ribs.
The vertical diameter increases by ‘piston
movement’ of the thoracoabdominal diaphragm.
During inspiration, the vertical diameter increases
by 3–5 cm and during expiration, the vertical
diameter decreases.
FURTHER READING
• Berdajs D, Zünd G, turina MI, Genoni M. Blood supply of
the sternum and its importance in internal thoracic artery
harvesting. Ann Thorac Surg 2006;81(6):2155–59.
• Kurihara Y, Yakushiji, Matsremoto J, Ishikawa T, Mirata K.
The ribs; anatomic 1999;19:105–19.
• Mirra JM. Unique tumors of the ribs. In: Mirra JM (ed) Bone
Tumours. Lea and Febiger, Philadelphia, 1989;1519–48.
1–5 From Medical Council of India, Competency based Undergraduate Curriculum for the Indian Medical Graduate, 2018;1:44–80.
--- Page 262 ---
BONES AND JOINTS OF THORAX
Thorax
Section 2
• Name the vertebrae with which head of 4th rib
articulates.
• What structures lie at the neck of 1st rib?
• Costodiaphragmatic recesses lie in relation to which
rib. What is its clinical importance?
• What type of joint is manubriosternal joint?
• Name the blood vessels related to manubrium sterni.
• What is sternal puncture? Where is it done and why?
• Which are the primary and secondary curvatures of
the vertebral column?
• What are pump-handle and bucket-handle move-
ments?
8. The lower larger facet on the head of a typical rib
articulates with the demifacet on:
a. Inferior part of corresponding vertebrae
b. Superior part of corresponding vertebrae
c. Inferior part of vertebra above the corresponding
vertebrae
d. Superior part of vertebra below the corres-
ponding vertebrae
1. b
2. a
3. c
4. a
5. c
6. c
7. c
8. b
--- Page 263 ---
THORAX
Thorax
Section 2
INTRODUCTION
The thorax is covered by muscles of pectoral region of
upper limb. In addition, the intercostal muscles and
membranes fill up the gaps between adjacent ribs and
cartilages. These muscles provide integrity to the
thoracic wall. A right and left pair of thoracic nerves
fulfil the exact definition of the dermatome.
The posterior intercostal vein, posterior intercostal
artery and intercostal nerve (VAN) lie from above
downwards in the costal groove of the ribs.
Sympathetic part of autonomic nervous system starts
from the lateral horns of thoracic 1 to thoracic 12
segments of the spinal cord. It continues up to lumbar
2 segment.
Coverings of the Thoracic Wall
The thoracic wall is covered from outside to inside by
the following structures—skin, superficial fascia, deep
fascia, and extrinsic muscles. The extrinsic muscles
covering the thorax are as follows.
Muscles of the Upper Limb
1 Pectoralis major
2 Trapezius
3 Serratus anterior
4 Pectoralis minor
5 Latissimus dorsi
6 Levator scapulae
7 Rhomboid major
8 Rhomboid minor
9 Serratus posterior superior
10 Serratus posterior inferior
Muscles of the Abdomen
1 Rectus abdominis
2 External oblique
Muscles of the Back
Erector spinae (sacrospinalis).
In addition to the muscles listed above, a number of
other muscles of the abdomen and of the head and neck
are attached to the margins of the two apertures of the
thorax.
THORACIC WALL PROPER
Features
The thoracic cage forms the skeletal framework of the
wall of the thorax. The gaps between the ribs are called
intercostal spaces. They are filled by the intercostal
muscles and contain the intercostal nerves, vessels and
lymphatics. There are nine intercostal spaces anteriorly
and eleven intercostal spaces posteriorly.
Competency achievement: The student should be able to:
AN 21.4 Describe and demonstrate extent, attachments, direction
of fibres, nerve supply and actions of intercostal muscles.1
INTERCOSTAL MUSCLES
These are:
1 The external intercostal muscle
2 The internal intercostal muscle
Each comprises intercartilaginous in front and inter-
osseous in posterolateral part.
3 The transversus thoracis muscle which is divisible
into three parts, namely the subcostalis, the inter-
costalis intimi (innermost intercostal) and the sterno-
costalis. The attachments of these muscles are given
in Table 14.1.
Extent
The external intercostal muscle extends from the tubercle
of the rib posteriorly to the costochondral junction
anteriorly. Between the costochondral junction and the
Walls of Thorax
Internal thoracic arteries are being used for cardiac bypass.
—Anonymous
--- Page 264 ---
WALLS OF THORAX
Thorax
Section 2
sternum, it is replaced by the external or anterior
intercostal membrane. The posterior end of the muscle is
continuous with the posterior fibres of the superior
costotransverse ligament (Figs 14.1a and b).
The internal intercostal muscle extends from the lateral
border of the sternum to the angle of the rib. Beyond
the angle, it becomes continuous with the internal or
posterior intercostal membrane, which is continuous with
the anterior fibres of the superior costotransverse ligament.
The subcostalis is confined to the posterior part of
the lower intercostal spaces only.
The intercostalis intimi is confined to the middle two-
fourths of all the intercostal spaces (Fig. 14.4).
The sternocostalis is present in relation to the anterior
parts of the upper intercostal spaces (Fig. 14.4).
Direction of Fibres
In the anterior part of the intercostal space:
1 The fibres of the external intercostal muscle run
downwards, forwards and medially in front.
2 The fibres of the internal intercostal run downwards,
backwards and laterally, i.e. at right angle to those
of the external intercostal.
3 The fibres of the transversus thoracis run in the same
direction as those of the internal intercostal.
Nerve Supply
All intercostal muscles are supplied by the intercostal
nerves of the spaces in which they lie.
Actions of the Intercostal Muscles
1 The main action of the intercostal muscles is to
prevent intercostal spaces being drawn in during
inspiration and bulging outwards during expiration.
2 The external intercostals, interchondral portions of
the internal intercostals, and the levator costae may
elevate the ribs during inspiration.
3 The internal intercostals except for the interchondral
portions and the transversus thoracis may depress the
ribs or cartilages during expiration.
Table 14.1: The attachments of the intercostal muscles (Figs 14.1 and 14.2)
Muscle
Origin
Insertion
1. External intercostal
Lower border of the rib above the space
Outer lip of the upper border of the rib below
2. Internal intercostal
Floor of the costal groove of the rib above
Inner lip of the upper border of the rib below
3. Transversus thoracis
a. Subcostalis
Inner surface of the rib near the angle
Inner surface of two or three ribs below
b. Intercostalis intimi/
Middle two-fourths of the ridge above the
Inner lip of the upper border of the rib below
innermost intercostal
costal groove
c. Sternocostalis
• Lower one-third of the posterior surface of
Costal cartilages of the 2nd to 6th ribs
the body of the sternum
• Posterior surface of the xiphoid
• Posterior surface of the costal cartilages of
the lower 3 or 4 true ribs near the sternum
Figs 14.1a and b: External and internal intercostal muscles with external and internal intercostal membranes
--- Page 265 ---
THORAX
Thorax
Section 2
Competency achievement: The student should be able to:
AN 21.5 Describe and demonstrate origin, course, relations and
branches of a typical intercostal nerve.2
AN 21.7 Mention the origin, course, relations and branches of:3
1. Atypical intercostal nerve.
2. Superior intercostal artery, subcostal artery.
INTERCOSTAL NERVES
The intercostal nerves are the ventral primary rami of
thoracic one to thoracic eleven (Fig. 14.3) spinal nerves
after the dorsal primary ramus has been given off. The
anterior primary ramus of the twelfth thoracic nerve
forms the subcostal nerve. In addition to supplying the
intercostal spaces, the upper two intercostal nerves also
supply the upper limb. The lower five intercostal nerves,
seventh to eleventh thoracic nerves, also supply
abdominal wall. These are, therefore, said to be thoraco-
abdominal nerves. The remaining nerves, third to sixth,
supply only the thoracic wall; they are called typical
intercostal nerves.
The subcostal nerve is distributed to the abdominal wall
and to the skin of the buttock.
Course
Intercostal nerve runs in the costal groove and ends
near the sternum.
Relations
1 Each nerve passes below the neck of the rib of the
same number and enters the costal groove.
2 In the costal groove, the nerve lies below the poste-
rior intercostal vessels. The relationship of structures
in the costal groove from above downwards is
posterior intercostal vein, posterior intercostal artery
and intercostal nerve (VAN) (Fig. 14.2).
In the posterior part of the costal groove, the nerve
lies between the pleura, with the endothoracic fascia
and the internal intercostal membrane.
In the greater part of the space, the nerve lies
between the intercostalis intimi and the internal
intercostal muscle (Fig. 14.4).
3 Near the sternum, the nerve crosses in front of the
internal thoracic vessels and the sternocostalis
muscle. It then pierces the internal intercostal muscle,
the external intercostal membrane and the pectoralis
major muscle to terminate as the anterior cutaneous
nerve of the thorax.
Branches
Muscular Branches
1 Numerous muscular branches supply the intercostal
muscles, the transversus thoracis and the serratus
posterior superior.
2 A collateral branch arises near the angle of the
rib and runs in the lower part of the space in the same
neurovascular plane. It supplies muscles of the space.
Sensory Branches
1 The main branch and the collateral branch also
supply parietal pleura, periosteum of the ribs. The
lower nerves in addition supply the parietal
peritoneum.
2 The lateral cutaneous branch arises near the angle
of the rib and accompanies the main trunk up to the
lateral thoracic wall where it pierces the intercostal
muscles and other muscles of the body wall along
the midaxillary line. It is distributed to the skin after
dividing into anterior and posterior branches.
3 The anterior cutaneous branch emerges on the side
of the sternum to supply the overlying skin after
dividing into medial and lateral branches.
Communicating Branches
1 Each nerve is connected to a thoracic sympathetic
ganglion by a distally placed white and a proximally
placed grey ramus communicans (Fig. 14.3).
2 The lateral cutaneous branch of the second intercostal
nerve is known as the intercostobrachial nerve. It
supplies the skin of the floor of the axilla and of the
upper part of the medial side of the arm (see Fig. 7.1).
DISSECTION
Detach the serratus anterior and the pectoralis major
muscles from the upper ribs. Note the external
intercostal muscle in the second and third intercostal
spaces. Its fibres run anteroinferiorly. Follow it forwards
to the external intercostal membrane which replaces it
between the costal cartilages (Figs 14.1a and b and 14.2).
Fig. 14.2: Section through intercostal space showing neuro-
vascular bundle and its collateral branches
--- Page 266 ---
WALLS OF THORAX
Thorax
Section 2
Cut the external intercostal membrane and muscle
along the lower border of two spaces. Reflect them
upwards to expose the internal intercostal muscle. The
direction of its fibres is posteroinferior, at right angle to
that of external oblique.
Follow the lateral cutaneous branch of one intercostal
nerve to its trunk deep to internal intercostal muscle.
Trace the nerve and accompanying vessels round the
thoracic wall. Note their collateral branches lying along
the upper margin of the rib below. Trace the muscular
branches of the trunk of intercostal nerve and its
collateral branch. Trace the anterior cutaneous nerve
as well (Fig. 14.3).
Fig. 14.3: Typical thoracic spinal nerve
Fig. 14.4: The course and branches of a typical intercostal nerve
--- Page 267 ---
THORAX
Thorax
Section 2
Identify the deepest muscle in the intercostal space,
the innermost intercostal muscle (Table 14.1). This
muscle is deficient in the anterior and posterior ends of
the intercostal spaces, where the neurovascular bundle
rests directly on the parietal pleura.
Expose the internal thoracic artery 1 cm from the
lateral margin of sternum by carefully removing the
intercostal muscles and membranes from the upper
three intercostal spaces (Fig. 14.11a).
Trace the artery through the upper six intercostal
spaces and identify its two terminal branches (see
Fig. 21.7). Trace its venae comitantes upwards till third
costal cartilage where these join to form internal thoracic
vein, which drains into the brachiocephalic vein.
Follow the course and branches of both anterior and
posterior intercostal arteries including the course and
tributaries of azygos vein (refer to BDC App).
CLINICAL ANATOMY
• Irritation of the intercostal nerves causes severe
pain which is referred to the front of the chest or
abdomen, i.e. at the peripheral termination of the
nerve. This is known as root pain or girdle pain.
• Herpes virus may cause infection of intercostal
nerves. If herpes infection is in 2nd thoracic nerve,
there is referred pain via intercostobrachial nerve
to the upper medial side of arm.
• Internal thoracic artery is mobilised and its distal
cut end is joined to the coronary artery distal to
its narrowed segment.
• Pus from the vertebral column tends to track
around the thorax along the course of the neuro-
Flowchart 14.1: Superior vena cava blockage before entry
of vena azygos
vascular bundle, and may point at any of the three
sites of exit of the branches of a thoracic nerve;
one dorsal primary ramus and two cutaneous
branches (Fig. 14.5).
• In superior vena caval obstruction before the
entry of vena azygos, the vena azygos is the
main channel which transmits the blood from the
upper half of the body to distal part of superior
Fig. 14.5: Possible paths of cold abscess (due to TB of vertebra) along the branches of spinal nerve
--- Page 268 ---
WALLS OF THORAX
Thorax
Section 2
Fig. 14.6: Obstruction to superior vena cava after entry of vena
azygos
Competency achievement: The student should be able to:
AN 21.6 Mention origin, course and branches/tributaries of:4
1. Anterior and posterior intercostal vessels.
2. Internal thoracic vessels.
AN 21.7 Mention the origin, course, relations and branches of:5
1. Atypical intercostal nerve.
2. Superior intercostal artery, subcostal artery.
TYPICAL INTERCOSTAL SPACES
Typical intercostal spaces are the spaces whose
intercostal nerves and vessels are confined to thoracic
wall only.
Boundaries
Superior: Upper border of the costal groove of the rib
above.
Inferior: Blunt upper border of the rib below.
Anterior: Lateral border of sternum.
Posterior: Body of thoracic vertebra.
Contents
1 All intercostal muscles
2 Two anterior intercostal arteries and veins
3 Posterior interocostal artery and vein with its
collateral branch and tributary
4 Intercostal nerve and its collateral branch (Fig. 14.2)
INTERCOSTAL ARTERIES
Each intercostal space contains one posterior intercostal
artery with its collateral branch and two anterior
intercostal arteries. The greater part of the space is
supplied by the posterior intercostal artery (Fig. 14.7).
Posterior Intercostal Arteries
These are 11 in number on each side, one in each space.
1 The first and second posterior intercostal arteries
arise from the superior intercostal artery which is a
branch of costocervical trunk of the subclavian artery.
2 The third to eleventh arteries arise from the
descending thoracic aorta (Fig. 14.8). The right-sided
arteries are longer than those of the left side as aorta
is to the left of median plane.
Course and Relations
In front of the vertebrae: The right posterior intercostal
arteries are longer than the left, and pass behind the
oesophagus, the thoracic duct, the azygos vein and the
sympathetic chain (Fig. 14.9).
The left posterior intercostal arteries pass behind the
hemiazygos vein and the sympathetic chain.
In the intercostal space: The artery is accompanied by
the intercostal vein and nerve, the relationship from
above downwards being vein–artery–nerve (VAN).
Flowchart 14.2: Superior vena cava blockage after entry of
vena azygos
vena cava (see Fig. 19.4 and Flowchart 14.1). In its
blockage after entry of vena azygos, flow of blood
is shown in Flowchart 14.2 and Fig. 14.6.
--- Page 269 ---
THORAX
Thorax
Section 2
The neurovascular bundle runs forwards in the costal
groove, first between the pleura and the internal
intercostal membrane and then between the internal
intercostal and intercostalis intimi muscles (Fig. 14.4).
Termination
Each posterior intercostal artery ends at the level of the
costochondral junction by anastomosing with the upper
anterior intercostal artery of the space (Fig. 14.7).
Branches
1 A dorsal branch supplies the muscles and skin of
the back, and gives off a spinal branch to the spinal
cord and vertebrae (Fig. 14.7).
2 A collateral branch arises near the angle of the rib,
descends to the upper border of the lower rib, and
Fig. 14.9: The origin of the right and left posterior intercostal
arteries from the aorta. Note that the arteries are longer on the
right side
Fig. 14.7: Scheme showing the intercostal arteries. Each intercostal space contains one posterior intercostal, its collateral branch
and two anterior intercostal arteries
Fig. 14.8: Branches of descending thoracic aorta
--- Page 270 ---
WALLS OF THORAX
Thorax
Section 2
ends by anastomosing with the lower anterior
intercostal artery of the space.
3 Muscular arteries are given off to the intercostal
muscles, the pectoral muscles and the serratus
anterior.
4 A lateral cutaneous branch accompanies the nerve
of the same name.
5 Mammary branches arise from the second, third and
fourth arteries and supply the mammary gland.
6 The right bronchial artery arises from the right third
posterior intercostal artery.
Anterior Intercostal Arteries
There are nine intercostal spaces anteriorly as only ten
ribs reach front of body. There are two anterior
intercostal arteries in each space. In the upper six spaces,
they arise from the internal thoracic artery (see Fig. 21.7).
In seventh to ninth spaces, the arteries are branches of
musculophrenic artery. The two anterior intercostal
arteries end at the costochondral junction by
anastomosing with the respective posterior intercostal
arteries and with the collateral branches of the posterior
intercostal arteries.
INTERCOSTAL VEINS
There are two anterior intercostal veins in each of the upper
nine spaces. They accompany the corresponding
arteries. In the upper three spaces, the veins end in the
internal thoracic vein. In 4–6 spaces, the veins end in
venae comitantes accompanying internal thoracic
artery. In the succeeding spaces, they end in the venae
comitantes accompanying musculophrenic artery.
There is one posterior intercostal vein and one collateral
vein in each intercostal space. Each vein accompanies
the corresponding artery and lies superior to the artery.
The tributaries of these veins correspond to the branches
of the arteries. They include veins from the vertebral
canal, the vertebral venous plexus, and the muscles and
skin of the back. Vein accompanying the collateral
branch of the artery drains into the posterior intercostal
vein.
The mode of termination of the posterior intercostal
veins is different on the right and left sides as given in
Table 14.2, and shown in Fig. 14.10.
Fig. 14.10: The veins on the posterior thoracic wall. Note the drainage of the posterior intercostal veins
Table 14.2: Termination of posterior intercostal veins
Veins
On right side
On left side
they drain into
they drain into
Right brachiocephalic Left brachiocephalic
vein
vein
2nd, 3rd,
Join to form right
Join to form left superior
superior intercostal
intercostal vein which
vein which drains into drains into the left
the azygos vein
brachiocephalic vein
5th to 8th
Azygos vein
Accessory hemiazygos
vein
9th to 11th
Azygos vein
Hemiazygos vein
subcostal
--- Page 271 ---
THORAX
Thorax
Section 2
The azygos and hemiazygos veins are described
later.
LYMPHATICS OF AN INTERCOSTAL SPACE
Lymphatics from the anterior part of the spaces pass to
the anterior intercostal or internal mammary nodes which
lie along the internal thoracic artery. Their efferents unite
with those of the tracheobronchial and brachiocephalic
nodes to form the bronchomediastinal trunk, which joins
the right lymphatic trunk on the right side and the thoracic
duct on the left side.
Lymphatics from the posterior part of the space pass
to the posterior intercostal nodes which lie on the heads
and necks of the ribs. Their efferents in the lower four
spaces unite to form a trunk which descends and opens
into the cisterna chyli. The efferents from the upper spaces
drain into left bronchomediastinal lymph trunk on the left
side and into right bronchomediastinal lymph trunk on the
right side (see Fig. 20.13).
INTERNAL THORACIC ARTERY
Origin
Internal thoracic artery arises from the inferior aspect
of the first part of the subclavian artery opposite the
thyrocervical trunk. The origin lies 2 cm above the
sternal end of the clavicle (Figs 14.11a and b).
Beginning, Course and Termination
Internal thoracic artery arises from lower border of 1st
part of subclavian artery. It descends medially and
downwards behind sternal end of clavicle, and 1st
costal cartilage. Runs vertically downwards 2 cm from
lateral border of sternum till 6th intercostal space.
The artery terminates in the sixth intercostal space
by dividing into the superior epigastric and musculo-
phrenic arteries.
The artery is accompanied by two venae comitantes
which unite at the level of the fourth costal cartilage to
form the internal thoracic or internal mammary vein.
The vein runs upwards along the medial side of the
artery to end in the brachiocephalic vein at the inlet of
the thorax.
A chain of lymph nodes lies along the artery.
Relations
Above the first costal cartilage, it runs downwards,
forwards and medially, behind:
1 The sternal end of the clavicle
2 The internal jugular vein
3 The brachiocephalic vein
4 The first costal cartilage
5 The phrenic nerve. It descends in front of the cervical
pleura.
Below the first costal cartilage, the artery runs vertically
downwards up to its termination in the 6th intercostal
space. Its relations are as follows.
Anteriorly
1 Pectoralis major
2 Upper six costal cartilages
3 External intercostal membranes
4 Internal intercostal muscles
5 The first six intercostal nerves (Fig. 14.4).
Figs 14.11a and b: (a) The origin of the internal thoracic artery from the first part of the subclavian artery, (b) course of internal
thoracic artery
--- Page 272 ---
WALLS OF THORAX
Thorax
Section 2
Posteriorly
The endothoracic fascia and pleura up to the second or
third costal cartilage. Below this level, the sternocostalis
muscle separates the artery from the pleura (Fig. 14.12).
Branches
1 The pericardiacophrenic artery arises in the root of the
neck and accompanies the phrenic nerve to reach the
diaphragm. It supplies the pericardium and the
pleura (see Fig. 15.1).
2 The mediastinal arteries are small irregular branches
that supply the thymus, in front of the pericardium,
and the fat in the mediastinum.
3 Two anterior intercostal arteries are given to each of
the upper six intercostal spaces.
4 The perforating branches accompany the anterior
cutaneous nerves. In the female, the perforating
branches in the second, third and fourth spaces are
large and supply the breast.
5 The superior epigastric artery runs downwards behind
the seventh costal cartilage and enters the rectus
sheath by passing between the sternal and costal slips
of the diaphragm (Fig. 14.11b).
6 The musculophrenic artery runs downwards and
laterally behind the seventh, eighth, and ninth costal
cartilages. It gives two anterior intercostal branches
to each of these three spaces. It perforates the
diaphragm near the 9th costal cartilage and termi-
nates by anastomosing with other arteries on the
undersurface of the diaphragm (Fig. 14.11b).
Note that through its various branches, the internal
thoracic artery supplies the anterior thoracic and
abdominal walls from the clavicle to the umbilicus.
Competency achievement: The student should be able to:
AN 23.3 Describe and demonstrate origin, course, relations,
tributaries and termination of superior vena cava, azygos,
hemiazygos and accessory hemiazygos veins.6
For superior vena cava see chapter 19.
AZYGOS VEIN
The azygos vein drains the thoracic wall and the upper
lumbar region (Figs 14.10 and see 20.6b and c). It forms
an important channel connecting the superior and
inferior venae cavae. The term ‘azygos’ means unpaired.
The vein occupies the upper part of the posterior
abdominal wall and the posterior mediastinum. It also
connects portal venous system, caval venous system
and vertebral venous system.
Formation
The azygos vein is formed by union of the lumbar
azygos, right subcostal and right ascending lumbar
veins.
1 The lumbar azygos vein may be regarded as the
abdominal part of the azygos vein. It lies to the right
of the lumbar vertebrae. Its lower end communicates
with the inferior vena cava.
2 The right subcostal vein accompanies the corres-
ponding artery.
3 The ascending lumbar vein is formed by vertical
anastomoses that connect the lumbar veins. The
azygos vein may be formed by union of the right
subcostal and ascending lumbar veins (Fig. 14.10).
Course
1 The azygos vein enters the thorax by passing through
the aortic opening of the diaphragm (see Fig. 12.16).
2 The azygos vein then ascends up to fourth thoracic
vertebra where it arches forwards over the root of
the right lung and ends by joining the posterior
aspect of the superior vena cava before it pierces the
pericardium (see Fig. 15.2).
Relations
Anteriorly: Oesophagus.
Posteriorly:
1 Lower eight thoracic vertebrae
2 Right posterior intercostal arteries
Fig. 14.12: Transverse section through the anterior thoracic wall to show the relations of the internal thoracic vessels. In the lower
part of their course, the vessels are separated from the pleura by the sternocostalis muscle
--- Page 273 ---
THORAX
Thorax
Section 2
To the right:
1 Right lung and pleura
2 Greater splanchnic nerve
To the left:
1 Thoracic duct and aorta in lower part
2 Oesophagus, trachea and vagus in the upper part
Tributaries
1 Right superior intercostal vein formed by union of
the second, third and fourth posterior intercostal
veins.
2 Fifth to eleventh right posterior intercostal veins
(Fig. 14.10).
3 Hemiazygos vein at the level of lower border of
eighth thoracic vertebra.
4 Accessory hemiazygos vein at the level of upper
border of eighth thoracic vertebra.
5 Right bronchial vein, near the terminal end of the
azygos vein.
6 Several oesophageal, mediastinal, pericardial veins.
HEMIAZYGOS VEIN
Hemiazygos vein is also called the inferior hemiazygos
vein. It is the mirror image of the lower part of the
azygos vein. The hemiazygos is formed by the union of
the left lumbar azygos, left ascending lumbar, and left
subcostal veins (Fig. 14.10).
Course
Hemiazygos vein pierces the left crus of the
diaphragm, ascends on the left side of the vertebra
overlapped by the aorta. At the level of eighth thoracic
vertebra, it turns to the right, passes behind the
oesophagus and the thoracic duct, and joins the azygos
vein (Fig. 14.10).
Tributaries
Ninth to eleventh left posterior intercostal veins and
oesophageal veins.
ACCESSORY HEMIAZYGOS VEIN
Accessory hemiazygos vein is also called the superior
hemiazygos vein. It is the mirror image of the upper part
of the azygos vein.
Course
Accessory hemiazygos vein begins at the medial end
of the fourth or fifth intercostal space, and descends
on the left side of the vertebral column. At the level of
eighth thoracic vertebra, it turns to the right, passes
behind the aorta and the thoracic duct, and joins the
azygos vein.
Tributaries
1 Fifth to eighth left posterior intercostal veins
2 Sometimes the left bronchial veins.
Competency achievement: The student should be able to:
AN 23.5 Identify and mention the location and extent of thoracic
sympathetic chain.7
AN 23.6 Describe the splanchnic nerves.8
THORACIC SYMPATHETIC TRUNK
Features
The thoracic sympathetic trunk is a ganglionated chain
situated one on each side of the thoracic vertebral
column. Superiorly, it is continuous with the cervical
part of the chain and inferiorly with the lumbar part
(Figs 14.13 and 14.14).
Theoretically, the chain bears 12 ganglia corres-
ponding to the 12 thoracic nerves. The first thoracic
ganglion is commonly fused with the inferior cervical
ganglion to form the cervicothoracic, or stellate ganglion.
The remaining thoracic ganglia generally lie at the levels
of the corresponding intervertebral discs and the
intercostal nerves.
Course and Relations
The chain crosses the neck of the first rib, the heads of
the second to tenth ribs, and bodies of the eleventh and
twelfth thoracic vertebrae. The whole chain descends
in front of the posterior intercostal vessels and the
intercostal nerves, and passes deep to the medial
arcuate ligament to become continuous with the lumbar
part of the sympathetic chain.
Branches
Lateral Branches for the Limbs and Body Wall
Each ganglion is connected with its corresponding
spinal nerve by two rami, the white (preganglionic) and
grey (postganglionic) rami communicantes. The white
ramus is distal to the grey ramus (see Appendix;
Fig. A2.3). The grey rami communicantes along with
spinal nerves supply structures in the skin and blood
vessels of skeletal muscles of the whole body (Fig.
14.14).
Medial Branches for the Viscera
1 Medial branches from the upper 5 ganglia
are postganglionic and get distributed to the heart,
the great vessels, the lungs and the oesophagus,
through the following.
a. Pulmonary branches to the pulmonary plexuses
b. Cardiac branches to the deep cardiac plexus
--- Page 274 ---
WALLS OF THORAX
Thorax
Section 2
Fig. 14.13: The thoracic part of the sympathetic trunk and its splanchnic branches
c. Aortic branches to thoracic aortic plexus
d. Oesophageal branches which join the oesophageal
plexus (Fig. 14.13).
2 Medial branches from the lower 7 ganglia are
preganglionic and form three splanchnic nerves.
a. The greater splanchnic nerve is formed by 5 roots
from ganglia 5 to 9. It descends obliquely on the
vertebral bodies, pierces the crus of the
diaphragm, and ends (in the abdomen) mainly
in the coeliac ganglion, and partly in the aortico-
renal ganglion and the suprarenal gland.
b. The lesser splanchnic nerve is formed by two roots
from ganglia 10 and 11. Its course is similar to
that of the greater splanchnic nerve. It pierces the
crus of the diaphragm, and ends in the coeliac
ganglion (Fig. 14.14).
c. The least (lowest) splanchnic nerve (renal nerve) is
tiny. It arises by one root from ganglion 12. It
pierces the corresponding crus of the diaphragm.
The sympathetic nervous system may be revised
from Chapter 7 of BD Chaurasia’s Handbook of
General Anatomy, 6th edition.
CLINICAL ANATOMY
• Cardiac pain is an ischaemic pain caused by
incomplete obstruction of a coronary artery.
Axons of pain fibres conveyed by the sensory
sympathetic cardiac nerves reach thoracic one to
thoracic five segments of spinal cord mostly through
the dorsal root ganglia of the left side. Since these
dorsal root ganglia also receive sensory impulses
from the medial side of arm, forearm and upper part
of front of chest, the pain gets referred to these areas
as depicted in Fig. 18.26.
--- Page 276 ---
WALLS OF THORAX
Thorax
Section 2
Though the pain is usually referred to the left side,
it may even be referred to right arm, jaw, epigastrium
or back.
FACTS TO REMEMBER
• Intercostal spaces are 11 on the back and only 9 in
front of chest.
• Intercostal muscles are in 3 layers—external,
internal and transversus. These correspond to the
muscle layers of anterior abdominal wall.
• Neurovascular bundle lies in the upper part of the
intercostal space in between internal and inner-
most intercostal muscles.
• Posterior intercostal artery and its collateral
branch supplies two-thirds of the intercostal space.
• Right posterior intercostal arteries are longer than
the left ones.
• Accessory hemiazygos vein drains 5–8 left
intercostal spaces and hemiazygos vein drains 9–
11 left intercostal spaces. Corresponding veins on
right side drain into vena azygos.
CLINICOANATOMICAL PROBLEM
One student is climbing the stairs at a fast pace as he
is late for his examination and the lift got out of order.
His heart is beating fast against his chest wall. He
has dryness of mouth and sweating of the palm.
• What is the reason for rapid heart beat (tachy-
cardia)?
• What is the effect of sympathetic on the skin?
Ans: As he is late for the examination, the sym-
pathetic system gets overactive, increasing the heart
rate, and blood pressure.
Sympathetic has three fold effect on the skin, i.e.
vasomotor, pilomotor and sudomotor. The sweat
secretion is markedly increased, including the pale
skin with hair standing erect.
Sympathetic activity decreases the secretion of the
glands. Dryness of mouth results from decreased
salivary secretion.
FURTHER READING
• Marchetti-Filho MA, Leão LE, Costa-Junior Ada S. The role
of intercostal nerve preservation in acute pain control after
thoracotomy. J Bras Pneumol 2014;40(2):164–70.
• Miller JI. Muscles of the chest wall. Thorac Surg Clin
2007;17(4):463–72.
1. Describe the course, branches of a typical thoracic
spinal nerve. What is its applied anatomy?
2. Describe the internal thoracic artery under
following headings: Origin, course, termination and
branches.
3. Write short notes on:
a. Posterior intercostal arteries
b. Vena azygos
c. Splanchnic nerves
d. Cardiac pain referred to medial side of left arm
e. Structures in the costal groove in order
f. Name the parts of parietal pleura with their nerve
supply.
g. Name the recesses of the pleura. What is their
clinical importance?
1–8 From Medical Council of India, Competency based Undergraduate Curriculum for the Indian Medical Graduate, 2018;1:44–80.
--- Page 277 ---
THORAX
Thorax
Section 2
1. The order of structures in the upper part of
intercostal space from above downwards is:
a. Vein, artery and nerve
b. Artery, vein and nerve
c. Vein, nerve and artery
d. Vein, nerve, artery and vein
2. Parts of transversus thoracis are all, except:
a. Subcostalis
b. Intercostalis intimi
c. Sternocostalis
d. Serratus posterior superior
3. Which of the following arteries are enlarged in
coarctation of aorta?
a. Subclavian
b. Internal mammary
c. Posterior intercostals
d. Anterior intercostals
4. Which posterior intercostal veins of left side drain
into accessory hemiazygos vein?
a. 1st to 5th
b. 2nd to 4th
c. 9th to 11th
d. 5th to 8th
5. Which one is not a branch of internal thoracic artery?
a. Superior epigastric
b. Musculophrenic
c. Anterior intercostal
d. Posterior intercostal
6. Thoracolumbar outflow starts from lateral horn of
which segments of spinal cord?
a. T1–L1 segments
b. T1–T12 segments
c. T1–L2 segments
d. T1–L5 segments
7. Following are the effects of sympathetic on skin,
except:
a. Sudomotor
b. Vasomotor
c. Pilomotor
d. Decreased pigmentation
1. a
2. d
3. c
4. d
5. d
6. c
7. d
• Name the structures ‘in order’ present in a costal
groove.
• Which are the typical intercostal nerves?
• What is the importance of thoracoepigastric vein?
• What does the word ‘azygos’ mean?
• How many spinal nerves have both white and grey
rami communicantes?
• How many intercostal spaces are present on anterior
and posterior aspects of thoracic cage?
• What is the common site for paracentesis thoracis
and why is this procedure carried out?
--- Page 278 ---
Thoracic Cavity and Pleurae
Laughter is the best medicine but being seldom used 
—Anonymous
THORACIC CAVITY
The spongy lungs occupying a major portion of
thoracic cavity are enveloped in a serous cavity—the
pleural cavity. There is always slight negative pressure
in this cavity. During inspiration, the pressure becomes
more negative, and air is drawn into the lungs covered
with its visceral and parietal layers of pleura. Visceral
layer is inseparable from the lung and is supplied and
drained by the same arteries, veins and nerves as lungs.
In a similar manner, the parietal pleura follows the walls
of the thoracic cavity with cervical, costal, dia-
phragmatic and mediastinal parts. Pleural cavity limits
the expansion of the lungs (Figs 15.1a–c).
DISSECTION
Divide the manubrium sterni transversely immediately
inferior to its junction with the first costal cartilage. Cut
through the parietal pleura in the first intercostal space
on both sides as far back as possible. Cut sternum at
the level of xiphisternal joint. Use a bone cutter to cut
2nd to 7th ribs in midaxillary line on each side of thorax.
Separate intercostal muscles in 1–6 spaces from
underlying pleura.
Lift the inferior part of manubrium and body of
sternum with ribs and costal cartilages and reflect it
towards abdomen. Identify the pleura extending from
the back of sternum onto the mediastinum to the level
of lower border of heart. Note the smooth surface of
pleura where it lines the thoracic wall and covers the
lateral aspects of mediastinum. Trace the surface
marking of parietal pleura on the skeleton.
Remove the pleura and the endothoracic fascia from
the back of sternum and costal cartilages which is
reflected towards abdomen. Identify the transversus
thoracis muscle and internal thoracic vessels.
Note the origin of diaphragm from the xiphoid process
and divide it. Identify the course and branches of
intercostal nerve again. Trace the nerve medially
superficial to the internal thoracic vessels.
Pull the lung laterally from the mediastinum and find
its root with the pulmonary ligament extending down-
wards from it. Cut through the structures, i.e. bronchus/
bronchi, pulmonary vessels, nerves, comprising its root
from above downwards close to the lung. Remove the
lung on each side. Be careful not to injure the lung or
your hand from the cut ends of the ribs.
Identify the phrenic nerve with accompanying blood
vessels anterior to the root of the lung. Make a
longitudinal incision through the pleura only parallel to
and on each side of the phrenic nerve. Strip the pleura
posterior to the nerve backwards to the intercostal
spaces. Pull the anterior flap forwards to reveal part of
the pericardium with the heart. Identify the following
structures seen through the pleura.
Right side
1. Bulge of the heart and pericardium anteroinferior to
the root of the lung (Fig. 15.2).
2. A longitudinal ridge formed by right brachiocephalic
vein down to first costal cartilage and by superior
vena cava up to the bulge of the heart.
3. A smaller longitudinal ridge formed by inferior vena
cava formed between the heart and the diaphragm.
4. Phrenic nerve with accompanying vessels forming
a vertical ridge on these two venae cavae passing
anterior to root of the lung.
5. Vena azygos arching over root of the lung to enter
the superior vena cava.
6. Trachea and oesophagus posterior to the phrenic
nerve and superior vena cava.
7. Right vagus nerve descending posteroinferiorly
across the trachea, behind the root of the lung.
--- Page 279 ---
THORAX
Thorax
Section 2
Fig. 15.2: Mediastinum as seen from the right side
Fig. 15.1: (a) Schematic transverse section of the thorax showing parts of the thoracic cavity, (b) vertical reflections of the pleura,
(c) transverse reflections of the pleura
--- Page 280 ---
THORACIC CAVITY AND PLEURAE
Thorax
Section 2
8. Bodies of the thoracic vertebrae behind oesophagus
with posterior intercostal vessels and azygos vein
lying over them.
9. Sympathetic trunk on the heads of the upper ribs
and on the sides of the vertebral bodies below this,
anterior to the posterior intercostal vessels and
intercostal nerves.
Left side
1. Bulge of the heart (Fig. 15.3).
2. Root of lung posterosuperior to it.
3. Descending aorta between (1) and (2) in front and
vertebral column behind.
4. Arch of aorta over the root of the lung.
5. Left common carotid and left subclavian arteries
passing superiorly from the arch of aorta.
6. Phrenic and vagus nerves descending between
these vessels and the lateral surface of the aortic
arch.
7. Sympathetic trunk same as on right side.
Identify longitudinally running sympathetic trunk on
the posterior part of thoracic cavity. Find delicate greater
and lesser splanchnic nerves arising from the trunk on
the medial side. Look carefully for grey and white rami
communicantes between the intercostal nerve and the
ganglia on the sympathetic trunk (see Fig. 14.3).
Trace the intercostal vessels above the intercostal
nerve. The order being vein, artery and nerve (VAN).
On the right side, identify and follow one of the divisions
of trachea to the lung root and the superior and inferior
venae cavae till the pericardium.
On the left side of thoracic cavity, dissect the arch of
aorta. Identify the superior cervical cardiac branch of
the left sympathetic trunk and the inferior cervical
cardiac branch of the left vagus on the arch of the aorta
between the vagus nerve posteriorly and phrenic nerve
anteriorly (cardiac nerves) (see Fig. 19.9).
The cavity of the thorax contains the right and left
pleural cavities which are completely invaginated and
occupied by the lungs. The right and left pleural cavities
are separated by a thick median partition called the
mediastinum. The heart lies in the mediastinum.
Competency achievement: The student should be able to:
AN 24.1 Mention the blood supply, lymphatic drainage and nerve
supply of pleura, extent of pleura and describe the pleural recesses
and their applied anatomy.1
PLEURAE
Features
Like the peritoneum, the pleura is a serous membrane
which is lined by mesothelium (flattened epithelium).
There are two pleural sacs, one on either side of the
Fig. 15.3: Mediastinum as seen from the left side
--- Page 281 ---
THORAX
Thorax
Section 2
mediastinum. Each pleural sac is invaginated from its
medial side by the lung, so that it has an outer layer,
the parietal pleura, and an inner layer, the visceral or
pulmonary pleura. The two layers are continuous with
each other around the hilum of the lung, and enclose
between them a potential space, the pleural cavity.
Table 15.1 shows comparison between visceral
pleura and parietal pleura.
Pulmonary/Visceral Pleura
The serous layer of pulmonary pleura covers the
surfaces and fissures of the lung, except at the hilum
and along the attachment of the pulmonary ligament
where it is continuous with the parietal pleura. It is
firmly adherent to the lung and cannot be separated
from it.
Surface Marking of the Lung/Visceral Pleura
The apex of the visceral pleura coincides with the
cervical pleura, and is represented by a line convex
upwards with a point 1 rising 2.5 cm above the medial
one-third of the clavicle (Fig. 15.4).
The anterior border of the right visceral pleura
corresponds very closely to the anterior margin or
costomediastinal line of the pleura and is obtained by
joining:
• A point 2 at the sternoclavicular joint,
• A point 3 in the median plane at the sternal angle,
• A point 4 in the median plane just above the
xiphisternal joint.
The anterior border of the left visceral pleura corresponds
to the anterior margin of the pleura up to the level of
the fourth costal cartilage points I–IV left side.
Table 15.1: Comparison of visceral and parietal pleurae
Visceral
Parietal
Development
Splanchnopleuric mesoderm
Somatopleuric mesoderm
Position
Lines surface of lung including
Lines thoracic wall, mediastinum
the fissures
and diaphragm
Nerve supply
Sympathetic nerves from T2–T5 ganglia
Thoracic nerves and
Parasympathetic from vagus nerve
phrenic nerves
Sensitivity
Insensitive to pain
Sensitive to pain which may be
referred.
Blood supply
Bronchial vessels
Intercostal and
pericardiacophrenic vessels
Lymph drainage
Tracheobronchial lymph nodes
Intercostal lymph nodes
Fig. 15.4: Surface projection of the parietal pleura (black); visceral pleura and lung (pink) on the front of thorax
--- Page 282 ---
THORACIC CAVITY AND PLEURAE
Thorax
Section 2
In the lower part, it presents a cardiac notch of
variable size. From the level of the fourth costal
cartilage, it passes laterally for 3.5 cm from the sternal
margin (V), and then curves downwards and medially
to reach the sixth costal cartilage 4 cm from the median
plane (VI). In the region of the cardiac notch, the peri-
cardium is covered only by a double layer of pleura.
The area of the cardiac notch is dull on percussion
and is called the area of superficial cardiac dullness
(Fig. 15.4).
The lower border of each visceral pleura lies two ribs
higher than the parietal pleural reflection. It crosses the
sixth rib in the midclavicular line (5), the eighth rib in
the midaxillary line (6 and VII), the tenth rib at the
lateral border of the erector spinae, and ends 2 cm
lateral to the tenth thoracic spine.
Parietal Pleura
The parietal pleura is thicker than the pulmonary
pleura, and is subdivided into the following four
parts.
1 Costal
2 Diaphragmatic
3 Mediastinal
4 Cervical (Figs 15.5a and b)
The costal pleura lines the thoracic wall which
comprises ribs and intercostal spaces to which it is
loosely attached by a layer of areolar tissue called the
endothoracic fascia.
The mediastinal pleura lines the corresponding surface
of the mediastinum. It is reflected over the root of the
lung and becomes continuous with the pulmonary
pleura around the hilum.
The cervical pleura extends into the neck, nearly 5 cm
above the first costal cartilage and 2.5 cm above the
medial one-third of the clavicle, and covers the apex of
the lung (see Fig. 12.10). It is covered by the suprapleural
membrane. Cervical pleura is related anteriorly to the
subclavian artery and the scalenus anterior; posteriorly
to the neck of the first rib and structures lying over it;
laterally to the scalenus medius; and medially to the
large vessels of the neck (see Fig. 12.10).
Diaphragmatic pleura lines the superior aspect of
diaphragm. It covers the base of the lung and gets
continuous with mediastinal pleura medially and costal
pleura laterally.
Features of Parietal Pleura
The cervical pleura is represented by a curved line
forming a dome over the medial one-third of the clavicle
with a height of about 2.5 cm above the clavicle
(Fig. 15.4). Pleura lies in the root of neck on both sides.
The anterior margin, or the costomediastinal line of
pleural reflection is as follows: On the right side, it
extends from the sternoclavicular joint downwards and
medially to the midpoint of the sternal angle. From here,
it continues vertically downwards to the midpoint of
the xiphisternal joint crosses to right of xiphicostal
angle. On the left side, the line follows the same course
up to the level of the fourth costal cartilage. It then
arches outwards and descends along the sternal margin
up to the sixth costal cartilage.
The inferior margin, or the costodiaphragmatic line of
pleural reflection passes laterally from the lower limit of
its anterior margin, so that it crosses the eighth rib in the
midclavicular line, the tenth rib in the midaxillary line,
and the twelfth rib at the lateral border of the
sacrospinalis muscle. Further it passes horizontally a
little below the 12th rib to the lower border of the twelfth
thoracic vertebra, 2 cm lateral to the upper border of the
twelfth thoracic spine (Fig. 15.7).
Thus the parietal pleurae descend below the costal
margin at three places, at the right xiphicostal angle,
and at the right and left costovertebral angles, below
the twelfth rib behind the upper poles of the kidneys.
Figs 15.5a and b: (a) The parietal pleura. The lung represented on the right is the early stage; (b) the parietal pleura as a half cone
--- Page 283 ---
THORAX
Thorax
Section 2
Fig. 15.8: Reflections of the pleura to show costodiaphragmatic
and costomediastinal recesses
The latter fact is of surgical importance in exposure of
the kidney. The pleura may be damaged at this site
(Fig. 15.7).
The posterior margins of the pleura pass from a point
2 cm lateral to the twelfth thoracic spine to a point 2 cm
lateral to the seventh cervical spine. The costal pleura
becomes the mediastinal pleura along this line.
Pulmonary Ligament
The parietal pleura surrounding the root of the lung
extends downwards beyond the root as a fold called the
pulmonary ligament. The fold contains a thin layer of loose
areolar tissue with a few lymphatics. Actually, it
provides a dead space into which the pulmonary veins
can expand during increased venous return as in
exercise. The lung roots can also descend into it with the
descent of the diaphragm (Fig. 15.6).
Recesses of Pleura
There are two recesses of parietal pleura, which act as
‘reserve spaces’ for the lung to expand during deep
inspiration (Figs 15.7 and 15.8).
The costomediastinal recess (Fig. 15.4) lies anteriorly,
behind the sternum and costal cartilages, between the
costal and mediastinal pleurae, particularly in relation
to the cardiac notch of the left lung. This recess is filled
up by the anterior margin of the lungs even during quiet
breathing. It is only obvious in the region of the cardiac
notch of the lung.
The costodiaphragmatic/costovertebral recess lies
inferiorly between the costal and diaphragmatic pleurae.
Vertically, it measures about 5 cm, and extends from the
eighth to tenth ribs along the midaxillary line (Fig. 15.7).
During inspiration, the lungs expand into these
recesses. So these recesses are obvious only in expiration
and not in deep inspiration.
Nerve Supply of the Pleura
The parietal pleura develops from the somatopleuric
layer of the lateral plate mesoderm, and is supplied by
the somatic nerves. These are the intercostal and phrenic
nerves. The parietal pleura is pain sensitive. The costal
and peripheral parts of the diaphragmatic pleurae are
supplied by the intercostal nerves, and the mediastinal
pleura and central part of the diaphragmatic pleurae are
supplied by the phrenic nerves (C4).
The pulmonary pleura develops from the splan-
chnopleuric layer of the lateral plate mesoderm, and
is supplied by autonomic nerves. The sympathetic
nerves are derived from second to fifth sympathetic
ganglia while parasympathetic nerves are drawn
from the vagus nerve. The nerves accompany the
bronchial vessels. This part of the pleura is not sensitive
to pain.
Sympathetic system dilates the bronchi. The para-
sympathetic system narrows the bronchial tree and is
also secretory to the glands.
Fig. 15.7: The pleural reflections—from behind
Fig. 15.6: Pleura at root of lung
--- Page 284 ---
THORACIC CAVITY AND PLEURAE
Thorax
Section 2
Blood Supply and Lymphatic Drainage of Pleura
The parietal pleura is a part and parcel of the thoracic
wall. Its blood supply and lymphatic drainage are,
therefore, the same as that of the body wall. It is thus
supplied by intercostal, internal thoracic and musculo-
phrenic arteries.
The veins drain mostly into the azygos and internal
thoracic veins. The lymphatics drain into the intercostal,
internal mammary, posterior mediastinal and dia-
phragmatic nodes.
The pulmonary pleura, like the lung, is supplied by
the bronchial arteries while the veins drain into
bronchial veins. It is drained by the bronchopulmonary
lymph nodes.
CLINICAL ANATOMY
• Aspiration of any fluid from the pleural cavity is
called paracentesis thoracis. It is usually done in the
eighth intercostal space in the midaxillary line
(Fig. 15.9). The needle is passed through the lower
part of the space to avoid injury to the principal
neurovascular bundle, i.e. vein, artery and nerve
(VAN).
• Some clinical conditions associated with the pleura
are as follows.
a. Pleurisy: This is inflammation of the pleura. It
may be dry, but often it is accompanied by
collection of fluid in the pleural cavity. The con-
dition is called the pleural effusion (Fig. 15.10).
Dry pleurisy is more painful because during
inspiration both layers come in contact and
there is friction.
b. Pneumothorax: Presence of air in the pleural
cavity.
c. Haemothorax: Presence of blood in the pleural
cavity.
d. Hydropneumothorax: Presence of both fluid and
air in the pleural cavity.
e. Empyema: Presence of pus in pleural cavity.
• Costal and peripheral parts of diaphragmatic
pleurae are innervated by intercostal nerves (Fig.
15.11). Hence irritation of these regions cause
referred pain along intercostal nerves to throacic
or abdominal wall. Mediastinal and central parts
of diaphragmatic pleurae are innervated by
phrenic nerve (C4). Hence irritation here causes
referred pain on tip of shoulders.
• Pain on right shoulder occurs due to inflam-
mation of gallbladder, while on left shoulder is
due to splenic rupture.
• Pleural effusion causes obliteration of costodia-
phragmatic recess.
Fig. 15.10: Pleural effusion
Fig. 15.11: Nerve supply of parietal pleura. Costal pleura and
cervical pleura innervated by intercostal nerves, and
mediastinal pleura and central part of diaphragmatic pleura
innervated by phrenic nerve
Fig. 15.9: Paracentesis thoracis
--- Page 285 ---
THORAX
Thorax
Section 2
Mnemonics
• Paracentesis thoracis is done in the lower part of
the intercostal space to avoid injury to the main
intercostal vessels and nerve.
• Pleural effusion is one of the sign of tuberculosis
of the lung.
CLINICOANATOMICAL PROBLEM
A child about 10 years of age had been having sore
throat, cough and fever. On the third day, he
developed severe cough, difficulty in breathing and
high temperature, with pain in his right side of chest,
right shoulder and around umbilicus.
• What is the probable diagnosis?
• Why does pain radiate to right shoulder and
periumbilical region?
Ans: The most probable diagnosis is pneumonia of
the right lung. The infection from pharynx spreads
down to the lungs. Pleura consists of two layers—
visceral and parietal; the former is insensitive to pain
and the latter is sensitive to pain. The costal part of
parietal pleura is supplied by intercostal nerves and
the mediastinal and central parts of diaphragmatic
pleurae are supplied by phrenic nerve (C4).
In pneumonia, there is always an element of
pleural infection. The pain of pleuritis radiates to
other areas. Due to infection in mediastinal and
central part of diaphragmatic pleura, the pain is
referred to tip of the right shoulder as this area is
supplied by supraclavicular nerves with the same
root value as phrenic nerve (C4).
The costal pleura is supplied by intercostal nerves.
These nerves also supply the skin of anterior
abdominal wall. So the pain of lower part of costal
pleura gets referred to skin of abdomen, in the
periumbilical area.
FURTHER READING
• Rajanna MJ. Anatomical and surgical considerations of the
phrenic and accessory phrenic nerves. J Inter Coll Surg 1947;
60:42–52.
• Tuli A, Mansda M, Raheja S, Gandhi A, Prakash A. Vascular
endothelial growth factor as a consequentional marker in
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Annals of anatomy
2014;196:101.
• Pleura extends beyond the thoracic cage at
following areas:
– Right xiphicostal angle (Fig. 15.4)
– Right and left costovertebral angles (Fig. 15.7)
– Right and left sides of root of neck as cervical
dome of pleura (Fig. 15.4).
The pleura may be injured at these sites during
surgical procedures. These sites have to be
remembered.
• During inspiration, pure air is withdrawn in the
lungs. At the same time, deoxygenated blood is
received through the pulmonary arteries. Thus an
exchange of gases occurs at the level of alveoli.
The deoxygenated blood gets oxygenated and sent
via pulmonary veins to the left atrium of heart.
The impure air containing carbon dioxide gets
expelled during expiration.
Pleura surface markings
“All the even ribs, in order: 2,4,6,8,10,12 show its
route”.
Rib 2: Both sides parietal pleura come close
Rib 4: The left pleura does a lateral shift to accommodate
heart
Rib 6: Both diverge laterally
Rib 8: Midclavicular line
Rib 10: Midaxillary line
Rib12: The back
FACTS TO REMEMBER
• Parietal pleura limits the expansion of the lungs.
• Visceral pleura behaves in same way as the lung.
• Parietal pleura has same nerve supply and blood
supply as the thoracic wall.
• Pleural cavity normally contains a minimal serous
fluid for lubrication during movements of thoracic
cage.
• Pleura lies beyond the thoracic cage at 5 places.
These are right and left cervical pleurae above the
1st rib and the clavicle; right and left costovertebral
angles and only right xiphicostal angle. Pleura is
likely to be injured at these places.
1 From Medical Council of India, Competency based Undergraduate Curriculum for the Indian Medical Graduate, 2018;1:44–80.
--- Page 286 ---
THORACIC CAVITY AND PLEURAE
Thorax
Section 2
1. Write short notes on:
a. Comparison of visceral and parietal pleura
b. Paracentesis thoracis
c. Name four clinical conditions associated with the
pleura
d. Sites where pleura (parietal) lies beyond the
thoracic cage
1. Which of the following nerves innervates the costal
pleura?
a. Vagus
b. Intercostal
c. Splanchnic
d. Phrenic
2. Which of the following nerves innervates the
mediastinal pleura?
a. Vagus
b. Phrenic
c. Intercostal
d. Splanchnic
3. All the following arteries supply parietal pleura,
except:
a. Musculophrenic
b. Internal thoracic
c. Intercostal
d. Bronchial
4. One of the following arteries supplies the visceral
pleura:
a. Bronchial
b. Musculophrenic
c. Internal thoracic
d. Superior epigastric
5. All are main big recesses of pleura, except:
a. Right costodiaphragmatic recess
b. Left costodiaphragmatic recess
c. Right costomediastinal recess
d. Left costomediastinal recess
1. b
2. b
3. d
4. a
5. c
• What are the parts of parietal pleura? Name their
nerve supply.
• Which nerves innervate the visceral pleura and why?
• Name the root value of phrenic nerve. What are the
parts of parietal pleura innervated by this nerve?
• Name the sites where pleura extends beyond the
thoracic cage.
• What are the differences between parietal and
visceral pleurae?
--- Page 287 ---
THORAX
Thorax
Section 2
Lungs
INTRODUCTION
The lungs occupying major portions of the thoracic
cavity, leave little space for the heart, which excavates
more of the left lung. The two lungs hold the heart tight
between them, providing it the protection, it rightly
deserves. There are ten bronchopulmonary segments
in each lung.
The lungs are a pair of respiratory organs situated
in the thoracic cavity. Each lung invaginates the
corresponding pleural cavity. The right and left lungs
are separated by the mediastinum.
The lungs are spongy in texture. In the young, the
lungs are brown or grey in colour. Gradually, they
become mottled black because of the deposition of
inhaled carbon particles. The right lung weighs about
700 g; it is about 50 to 100 g heavier than the left lung.
DISSECTION
Identify the lungs by the thin anterior border, thick
posterior border, conical apex, wider base, medial surface
with hilum and costal surface with impressions of the
ribs and intercostal spaces. In addition, the right lung is
distinguished by the presence of three lobes, whereas
left lung comprises two lobes only (refer to BDC App).
On the mediastinal part of the medial surface of right
lung identify two bronchi—the eparterial and hyparterial
bronchi, with bronchial vessels and posterior pulmonary
plexus, the pulmonary artery between the two bronchi
on an anterior plane. The upper pulmonary vein is
situated still on an anterior plane while the lower
pulmonary vein is identified below the bronchi.
The impressions on the right lung in front of root of
lung are of superior vena cava, inferior vena cava, and
right ventricle. The impressions behind the root of lung
are those of vena azygos and oesophagus (Table 16.1).
Hilum of the left lung shows the single bronchus situated
posteriorly, with bronchial vessels and posterior pulmonary
plexus. The pulmonary artery lies above the bronchus.
Anterior to the bronchus is the upper pulmonary vein, while
the lower vein lies below the bronchus.
The mediastinal surface of left lung has the
impression of left ventricle, ascending aorta. Behind the
root of the left lung are the impressions of descending
thoracic aorta while oesophagus leaves an impression
in the lower part only (Refer to BDC App).
LUNGS
Features
Each lung is conical in shape (Fig. 16.1). It has:
1 An apex at the upper end.
2 A base resting on the diaphragm.
3 Three borders, i.e. anterior, posterior and inferior.
4 Two surfaces, i.e. costal and medial. The medial
surface is divided into vertebral and mediastinal parts.
The apex is blunt and lies above the level of the
anterior end of the first rib. It reaches nearly 2.5 cm
above the medial one-third of the clavicle, just medial
to the supraclavicular fossa. It is covered by the cervical
pleura, the suprapleural membrane, and is grooved by
the subclavian artery on the medial side and anteriorly
(see Fig. 12.10).
The base is semilunar and concave. It rests on the
diaphragm which separates the right lung from the
right lobe of the liver, and the left lung from the left
lobe of the liver, the fundus of the stomach, and the
spleen (see Fig. 15.8).
The anterior border is very thin (Figs 16.2 and 16.3). It
is shorter than the posterior border. On the right side,
it is vertical and corresponds to the anterior or
costomediastinal line of pleural reflection. The anterior
border of the left lung shows a wide cardiac notch below
the level of the fourth costal cartilage. The heart and
pericardium are not covered by the lung in the region
of this notch.
One thousand Americans and same number of Indians stop smoking everyday – by dying 
—Anonymous
--- Page 288 ---
LUNGS
Thorax
Section 2
Fissures and Lobes of the Lungs
The right lung is divided into three lobes (upper, middle
and lower) by two fissures (oblique and horizontal).
The left lung is divided into two lobes by the oblique
fissure (Fig. 16.1a).
The oblique fissure cuts into the whole thickness of
the lung, except at the hilum. It passes obliquely
downwards and forwards, crossing the posterior
border about 6 cm below the apex and the inferior
border about 5 cm from the median plane. Due to the
oblique plane of the fissure, the lower lobe is more
posterior and the upper and middle lobes more anterior.
In the right lung, the horizontal fissure passes from
the anterior border up to the oblique fissure and
separates a wedge-shaped middle lobe from the upper
lobe. The fissure runs horizontally at the level of the
fourth costal cartilage and meets the oblique fissure in
the midaxillary line.
The tongue-shaped projection of the left lung below
the cardiac notch is called the lingula. It corresponds to
the middle lobe of the right lung.
The lungs expand maximally in the inferior direction
because movements of the thoracic wall and diaphragm
are maximal towards the base of the lung. The presence
of the oblique fissure of each lung allows a more
uniform expansion of the whole lung.
Surface Marking of the Lung
Surface marking of lung is same as that of visceral pleura
described in Chapter 15. The surface marking of oblique
and horizontal fissures is mentioned here.
The oblique fissure can be drawn by joining:
a. A point 2 cm lateral to the third thoracic spine.
b. Another point on the fifth rib in the midaxillary
line (see Fig. 15.4).
Fig. 16.1a: The trachea and lungs as seen from the front
Fig. 16.1b: Trachea, lungs and heart as seen from the front
The posterior border is thick and ill defined. It
corresponds to the medial margins of the heads of the
ribs. It extends from the level of the seventh cervical
spine to the tenth thoracic spine.
The inferior border separates the base from the costal
and medial surfaces.
The costal surface is large and convex. It is in contact
with the costal pleura and the overlying thoracic wall.
The medial surface is divided into a posterior or
vertebral part, and an anterior or mediastinal part. The
vertebral part is related to the vertebral bodies,
intervertebral discs, the posterior intercostal vessels and
the splanchnic nerves (see Figs 15.2 and 15.3). The
mediastinal part is related to the mediastinal septum,
and shows a cardiac impression, the hilum and a
number of other impressions which differ on the two
sides. Various relations of the mediastinal surfaces of
the two lungs are listed in Table 16.1.
--- Page 289 ---
THORAX
Thorax
Section 2
Fig. 16.3: Impressions on the mediastinal surface of the left lung
Fig. 16.2: Impressions on the mediastinal surface of the right lung
--- Page 290 ---
LUNGS
Thorax
Section 2
Arrangement of Structures in the Root
Right side: From posterior to anterior side:
1. Eparterial bronchus, hyparterial bronchus with
bronchial vessels and posterior pulmonary plexus
along their posterior walls (Figs 16.4a and b).
2. Pulmonary artery in midplane between the two bronchi.
3. Superior and inferior pulmonary veins in anterior part.
4. Anterior pulmonary plexus, lymph nodes and lymph
vessels in the anterior and inferior parts.
Left side: From posterior to anterior side:
1. Single bronchus with bronchial vessels and posterior
pulmonary plexus along its posterior wall.
2. Pulmonary artery in middle area placed above the
bronchus (Figs 16.4a and b).
3. Superior and inferior pulmonary veins in anterior part.
4. Anterior pulmonary plexus, lymph nodes and lymph
vessels in the anterior and inferior parts.
Relations of the Root
Anterior
1 Common on the two sides:
a. Phrenic nerve
b. Pericardiacophrenic vessels
c. Anterior pulmonary plexus
2 On the right side:
a. Superior vena cava (Fig. 16.2)
b. A part of the right atrium.
Posterior
1 Common on the two sides:
a. Vagus nerve
b. Posterior pulmonary plexus
2 On left side: Descending thoracic aorta
Superior
1 On right side: Terminal part of azygos vein
2 On left side: Arch of the aorta.
Inferior
Pulmonary ligament.
Differences between the Right and Left Lungs
Differences between right and left lungs are given in
Table 16.2.
Competency achievement: The student should be able to:
AN 24.5 Mention the blood supply, lymphatic drainage and nerve
supply of lungs.2
Arterial Supply
The bronchial arteries supply nutrition to the bronchial
tree and to the pulmonary tissue. These are small
arteries that vary in number, size and origin, but usually
they are as follows:
c. A third point on the sixth costal cartilage 7.5 cm
from the median plane.
The horizontal fissure is represented by a line joining:
a. A point on the anterior border of the right lung at
the level of the fourth costal cartilage.
b. A second point on the fifth rib in the midaxillary line.
Competency achievement: The student should be able to:
AN 24.2 Identify side, external features and relations of structures
which form root of lung and bronchial tree and their clinical
correlate.1
Root of the Lung
Root of the lung is a short, broad pedicle which connects
the medial surface of the lung to the mediastinum. It is
formed by structures which either enter or come out of
the lung at the hilum (Latin depression). The roots of
the lungs lie opposite the bodies of the fifth, sixth and
seventh thoracic vertebrae.
Contents
The root is made up of the following structures.
1 Principal bronchus on the left side, and eparterial and
hyparterial bronchi on the right side in posterior part.
2 One pulmonary artery in middle part.
3 Two pulmonary veins, superior and inferior, in
anterior part (Figs 16.4a and b).
4 Bronchial arteries—one on the right side and two on
the left side.
5 Bronchial veins
6 Anterior and posterior pulmonary plexuses of nerves
7 Lymphatics of the lung
8 Bronchopulmonary lymph nodes
9 Areolar tissue
Table 16.1: Structures related to the mediastinal
surfaces of the right and left lungs
Right side (Fig.16.2)
Left side (Fig.16.3)
1. Right atrium and auricle
1. Left ventricle, left auricle,
infundibulum and adjoining
part of the right ventricle
2. A small part of the right
2. Pulmonary trunk
ventricle
3. Superior vena cava
3. Arch of aorta
4. Lower part of the right
4. Descending thoracic aorta
brachiocephalic vein
5. Azygos vein
5. Left subclavian artery
6. Oesophagus
6. Thoracic duct
7. Inferior vena cava
7. Oesophagus
8. Trachea
8. Left brachiocephalic vein
9. Right vagus nerve
9. Left vagus nerve
10.Right phrenic nerve
10. Left phrenic nerve
11. Left recurrent laryngeal nerve
--- Page 291 ---
THORAX
Thorax
Section 2
1 On the right side, there is one bronchial artery
which arises from the third right posterior inter-
costal artery.
2 On the left side, there are two bronchial arteries, both
of which arise from the descending thoracic aorta,
the upper opposite fifth thoracic vertebra and the
lower just below the left bronchus.
Deoxygenated blood is brought to the lungs by the
two pulmonary arteries and oxygenated blood is
returned to the heart by the four pulmonary veins.
There are precapillary anastomoses between
bronchial and pulmonary arteries. These connections
enlarge when any one of them is obstructed in
disease.
Table 16.2: Differences between the right and left lungs
Right lung (Fig. 16.4a)
Left lung
1. Shorter and broader
1. Longer and narrower
2. Larger and heavier,
2. Smaller and lighter, weighs
weighs about 700 g
about 600 g
3. Anterior border is
3. Anterior border is interrupted
straight
by the cardiac notch
4. Cardiac impression
4. Cardiac impression deep
shallow/absent
5. Absence of lingula
5. Lingula present
6. It has 2 fissures and
6. It has only one fissure and
3 lobes
2 lobes
Fig. 16.4a: Roots of the right and left lungs
Fig. 16.4b: Gross anatomy of lungs including their roots
--- Page 292 ---
LUNGS
Thorax
Section 2
Venous Drainage of the Lungs
The venous blood from the first and second divisions
of the bronchi is carried by bronchial veins. Usually
there are two bronchial veins on each side. The right
bronchial veins drain into the azygos vein. The left
bronchial veins drain into the hemiazygos vein.
The greater part of the venous blood from the lungs
is drained by the pulmonary veins.
Lymphatic Drainage
There are two sets of lymphatics, both of which drain
into the bronchopulmonary nodes.
1 Superficial vessels drain the peripheral lung tissue
lying beneath the pulmonary pleura. The vessels pass
round the borders of the lung and margins of the
fissures to reach the hilum.
2 Deep lymphatics drain the bronchial tree, the
pulmonary vessels and the connective tissue septa.
They run towards the hilum where they drain into
the bronchopulmonary nodes (Fig. 16.4a).
The superficial vessels have numerous valves and
the deep vessels have only a few valves or no valves at
all. Though there is no free anastomosis between the
superficial and deep vessels, some connections exist
which can open up, so that lymph can flow from the
deep to the superficial lymphatics when the deep
vessels are obstructed in disease of the lungs or of the
lymph nodes.
Nerve Supply
1 Parasympathetic nerves are derived from the vagus.
These fibres are:
a. Motor to the bronchial muscles, and on stimul-
ation cause bronchospasm.
b. Secretomotor to the mucous glands of the
bronchial tree.
c. Sensory fibres are responsible for the stretch reflex
of the lungs, and for the cough reflex.
2 Sympathetic nerves are derived from second to fifth
sympathetic ganglia. These are inhibitory to the
smooth muscle and glands of the bronchial tree. That
is how sympathomimetic drugs, like adrenaline, cause
bronchodilatation and relieve symptoms of bronchial
asthma.
Both parasympathetic and sympathetic nerves first
form anterior and posterior pulmonary plexuses
situated in front of and behind the lung roots: From
the plexuses, nerves are distributed to the lungs along
the blood vessels and bronchi (Fig. 16.4).
BRONCHIAL TREE
Features
The trachea divides at the level of the lower border of
the fourth thoracic vertebra into two primary principal
bronchi, one for each lung. The right principal bronchus
is 2.5 cm long. It is shorter, wider and more in line with
the trachea than the left principal bronchus (Fig. 16.5a).
Inhaled particles or foreign bodies, therefore, tend to
pass more frequently to the right lung, with the result
that infections are more common on the right side than
on the left.
The left principal bronchus is 5 cm. It is longer,
narrower and more oblique than the right bronchus.
Right bronchus makes an angle of 25° with tracheal
bifurcation, while left bronchus makes an angle of 45°
with the trachea.
Each principal bronchus enters the lung through the
hilum, and divides into secondary lobar bronchi, one for
each lobe of the lungs. Thus there are three lobar
bronchi on the right side, and only two on the left
side. Each lobar bronchus divides into tertiary or
segmental bronchi, one for each bronchopulmonary
segment; which are 10 on the right side and 10 on the
left side. The segmental bronchi divide repeatedly to
form very small branches called terminal bronchioles.
Still smaller branches are called respiratory bronchioles
(Fig. 16.6).
Each respiratory bronchiole aerates a small part of
the lung known as a pulmonary unit. The respiratory
bronchiole ends in microscopic passages which are
termed:
1 Alveolar ducts (Fig. 16.7)
2 Atria
3 Air saccules
4 Pulmonary alveoli (Latin small cavity). Gaseous
exchanges take place in the alveoli.
DISSECTION
Dissect the principal bronchus into the left lung. Remove
the pulmonary tissue and follow the main bronchus till
it is seen to divide into two lobar bronchi. Try to dissect
till these divide into the segmental bronchi (Fig. 16.5a).
Dissect the principal bronchus into the right lung.
Remove the pulmonary tissue and follow the main
bronchus till it is seen to divide into three lobar bronchi.
Try to dissect till these divide into segmental bronchi.
Competency achievement: The student should be able to:
AN 24.3 Describe a bronchopulmonary segment.3
--- Page 293 ---
THORAX
Thorax
Section 2
Bronchopulmonary Segments
The most widely accepted classification of segments is
given in Table 16.3. There are 10 segments on the right
side and 10 on the left side (Figs 16.5a–c and 16.8 a and b).
Definition
Bronchopulmonary segments are well-defined
anatomical segments aerated by tertiary/segmental
bronchus. These are pyramidal in shape with apex
directed towards hilum and base directed towards
periphery having their own arterial supply; but venous
drainage is shared by adjacent bronchopulmonary
segment.
Features
1 These are well-defined anatomic, functional and
surgical sectors of the lung.
2 Each one is aerated by a tertiary or segmental
bronchus.
3 Each segment is pyramidal in shape with its apex
directed towards the root of the lung (Fig. 16.8).
Table 16.3: The bronchopulmonary segments
Right lung
Lobes
Segments
A. Upper
1. Apical
2. Posterior
3. Anterior
B. Middle
4. Lateral
5. Medial
C. Lower
6. Superior
7. Medial basal
8. Anterior basal
9. Lateral basal
10. Posterior basal
Left lung
A. Upper
1. Apical
• Upper division
2. Posterior
3. Anterior
• Lower division
4. Superior lingular
5. Inferior lingular
B. Lower
6. Superior
7. Medial basal
8. Anterior basal
9. Lateral basal
10. Posterior basal
Figs 16.5a–c: Bronchopulmonary segments of the lungs (both sides 1 to 10, see Table 16.3). Medial basal segments are not seen
in (b) and (c).
--- Page 294 ---
LUNGS
Thorax
Section 2
Fig. 16.7: Parts of a pulmonary unit
Fig. 16.6: Bronchial tree
Figs 16.8a and b: The bronchopulmonary segments as seen on: (a) The costal aspects of the right and left lungs. Medial basal
segments (no. 7) are not seen, and (b) segments seen on the medial surface of left and right lungs. Lateral segment of middle lobe
(no. 4) is not seen on right side
--- Page 295 ---
THORAX
Thorax
Section 2
4 Each segment has a segmental bronchus, segmental
artery, autonomic nerves and lymph vessels.
5 The segmental venules lies in the connective tissue
between adjacent pulmonary units of bronchopul-
monary segments.
6 During segmental resection, the surgeon works
along the segmental veins to isolate a particular
segment.
Relation to Pulmonary Artery
The branches of the pulmonary artery accompany the
bronchi. The artery lies dorsolateral to the bronchus.
Thus each segment has its own separate artery
(Fig. 16.9).
Relation to Pulmonary Vein
The pulmonary veins do not accompany the bronchi
or pulmonary arteries. They run in the intersegmental
planes. Thus each segment has more than one vein and
each vein drains more than one segment. Near the
hilum, the veins are ventromedial to the bronchus.
It should be noted that the bronchopulmonary
segment is not a bronchovascular segment because it
does not have its own vein.
Competency achievement: The student should be able to:
AN 25.2 Describe development of pleura, lung and heart.4
DEVELOPMENT OF RESPIRATORY SYSTEM
The lower respiratory tract primordium appears in the
third week of intrauterine life in the form of an
outgrowth (respiratory diverticulum) from the ventral
wall of the primitive pharynx, i.e. the part of the
foregut caudal to the hypobranchial eminence. Hence
epithelial lining of the respiratory system is
endodermal in origin. It forms the lining of the larynx,
the trachea, the bronchi and the pulmonary alveoli.
The connective tissue, cartilage and smooth muscles
of these structures develop from splanchnic
mesenchyme surrounding the foregut. As develop-
ment progresses, the diverticulum separates from the
foregut by the tracheo-oesophageal septum (except at
the entrance to the larynx).
The respiratory diverticulum below the larynx grows
caudally and forms the trachea in the midline. This
bifurcates into two lateral outpocketings; the lung buds.
In the fifth week of intrauterine life, the proximal parts
of each lung bud forms the principal bronchi. Each of
these grows laterally and invaginates the pericardio-
peritoneal canals (primitive pleural cavities). Following
this, the primary bronchi divide into secondary bronchi
(3 on the right side and 2 on the left side). These divide
dichotomously into tertiary bronchi. Each tertiary
bronchus with its surrounding mesenchyme forms a
bronchopulmonary segment. By 24th week, about 17
orders of branches are formed and the lung parenchyma
develops in four stages.
1 Pseudoglandular stage (between 5 and 17 weeks).
In this stage, developing lung resembles a gland.
2 Canalicular stage (between 16 and 25 weeks), the
lumina of bronchi and bronchioles become larger and
tissue becomes more vascular.
3 Terminal sac stage (between 24 weeks to birth). Many
saccules appear at the ends of terminal bronchioles
(terminal sacs). Capillaries bulge into these sacs.
4 Alveolar stage (late fetal period to 8 years after birth).
The epithelial lining of the sacs becomes an extremely
thin squamous layer and the alveolocapillary
membrane allows exchange of gases.
The four stages overlap each other because the
cranial segments of the lungs mature faster than the
caudal ones.
By 28–32 weeks, some of the alveolar epithelial cells
secrete a substance which is capable of lowering the
surface tension at the air–alveolar interface and thus
helps maintaining the patency of the alveoli; this is
known as pulmonary surfactant.
Table 16.4 and Flowchart 16.1 show the development
of respiratory system.
Molecular Regulation
1. Transcription factor (TBX4) expressed in the
endoderm of gut tube at the site of respiratory
diverticulum induces formation of lung bud and is
responsible for growth and differentiation of lungs.
2. Fibroblast growth factor 10 (FGF10) and other signals
from splanchnic mesenchyme probably induces the
outgrowth of tracheal bud.
Fig. 16.9: Distal portions of adjacent bronchopulmonary
segments
--- Page 296 ---
LUNGS
Thorax
Section 2
Congenital Anomalies
1 Tracheo-oesophageal fistula: This abnormal
communication between the trachea and the
oesophagus is due to a deviation of the oesophago-
tracheal septum or from mechanical factor pushing
the dorsal wall of the foregut anteriorly.
2 Tracheal stenosis
3 Azygos lobe of lung around vena azygos: This may be
due to an additional respiratory bud which develops
independently of the main respiratory system.
4 Hyaline membrane disease or distress syndrome:
This is due to a deficiency of pulmonary surfactant.
5 Agenesis of lung.
HISTOLOGY
In a section of the lung, the mesothelial covering of
visceral pleura may be visible. The structure of the lung
is a lacework of alveoli separated by thin-walled septa.
This is traversed by system of intrapulmonary bronchi,
bronchioles and alveolar ducts, into which atria,
alveolar sacs and alveoli open.
Intrapulmonary Bronchus
Intrapulmonary bronchus is lined by pseudostratified
ciliated columnar epithelium with goblet cells resting on
a thin basement membrane. Cilia prevent the
accumulation of mucus in the bronchial tree. The
lamina propria consists of reticular and elastic fibres.
The submucous coat contains both mucous and serous
acini. A complete layer of smooth muscle fibres is
present which is responsible for infoldings of the
mucous membrane. Outermost is the hyaline cartilage
which is visible as small cartilaginous plates of varying
sizes and shapes (Fig. 16.10) with tunica adventitia.
Terminal bronchiole is part of the conducting system
of respiratory pathway which is less than 1 mm in
diameter. It is lined by simple columnar epithelium. The
lamina propria contains elastic and smooth muscle fibres.
Both the glands and cartilage plates are absent (Fig. 16.11).
Table 16.4: Development of components of respiratory system
S. no.
Component
Developed from
Epithelium of larynx, trachea, bronchi and alveoli
Endoderm of foregut
Muscles of larynx
Branchial mesoderm of IVth and VIth arches
Cartilages of larynx
IV arch cartilage
• Thyroid
VI arch cartilage
• Cricoid
• Arytenoid
Epiglottis
Dorsal part of hypobranchial eminence (fused
ventral part of III and IV arches)
Glands of respiratory tract
Endoderm
Muscles, cartilages and connective tissue of trachea and bronchi
Splanchnic mesoderm
3. Sonic hedgehog (SHH-GLi) and other signaling
molecules are involved in the epithelial mesenchyme
interaction which governs the branching of tracheal
bud and its proliferation.
Flowchart 16.1: Quick review of sequence of development of
respiratory system
--- Page 297 ---
THORAX
Thorax
Section 2
Fig. 16.12: Segmental resection
membrane. The main support of the alveoli is provided
by elastic fibres. Majority of cells lining the alveoli are
the squamous cells or type I pneumocytes. A few cells are
larger cells or type II pneumocytes. Type II cells secrete
the surfactant which lowers surface tension and prevents
alveoli from collapsing.
The interalveolar septum containing numerous
capillaries lined by continuous non-fenestrated
endothelial cells is present between the adjacent alveoli.
CLINICAL ANATOMY
• Usually, the infection of a bronchopulmonary
segment remains restricted to it, although
tuberculosis and bronchogenic carcinoma may
spread from one segment to another.
• Knowledge of the detailed anatomy of the
bronchial tree helps considerably in:
a. Segmental resection (Fig. 16.12).
b. Visualising the interior of the bronchi through
a bronchoscope passed through the mouth and
trachea. The procedure is called bronchoscopy.
• Carina is a hook-shaped process projecting
backwards from the lower margin of lowest
tracheal ring. It helps to divide trachea into
two primary bronchi. Right bronchus makes an
angle of 25°, while left one makes an angle of 45°.
Foreign bodies mostly descend into right bronchus
(Fig. 16.13) as it is wider and more vertical than
the left bronchus. Enlarged lymph nodes present
in this area may distort the carina.
• Carina (Latin keel) of the trachea is a sensitive area.
When patient is made to lie on her/his left side,
secretions from right bronchial tree flow towards
the carina due to effect of gravity. This stimulates
the cough reflex, and sputum is brought out. This
is called postural drainage (Fig. 16.14).
Fig. 16.10: Intrapulmonary bronchus
Fig. 16.11: Structure of terminal bronchiole
Respiratory Bronchiole
Respiratory bronchiole is lined by cuboidal epithelium.
The walls consist of collagenous connective tissue
containing bundles of interlacing smooth muscle fibres
and elastic fibres. At number of places, the alveolar sacs
and alveoli arise from the respiratory bronchiole and
its cuboidal epithelium is continuous with the
squamous epithelium of alveolar sacs and alveoli.
Alveoli
Alveoli are thin-walled polyhedral sacs. The alveoli are
lined by two types of cells, which rest on a basement
--- Page 298 ---
LUNGS
Thorax
Section 2
Fig. 16.13: Angles of right and left bronchi with carina
Fig. 16.14: Postural drainage from right lung
• Paradoxical respiration: During inspiration,
the flail (abnormally mobile) segments of ribs are
pulled inside the chest wall while during expira-
tion the ribs are pushed out (Fig. 16.15).
• Tuberculosis of lung is one of the commonest
diseases. A complete course of treatment must be
taken under the guidance of a physician.
Fig. 16.15: Paradoxical respiration
• Bronchial asthma is a common disease of res-
piratory system. It occurs due to bronchospasm
of smooth muscles in the wall of bronchioles.
Patient has difficulty especially during expiration.
It is accompanied by wheezing. Epinephrine, a
sympathomimetic drug, relieves the symptoms.
• Auscultation of lung: Upper lobe is auscultated
above 4th rib on both sides; lower lobes are best
heard on the back. Middle lobe is auscultated
between 4th and 6th ribs on right side.
• Superior segment of lower lobe is the most depen-
dent bronchopulmonary segment in supine
position. Foreign bodies are likely to be lodged here.
Mnemonics
Bronchopulmonary segments of right lung
“A PALM Seed Makes Another Little Palm”.
In order from superior to inferior:
Apical
Posterior
Anterior
Lateral
Medial
Superior
Medial basal
Anterior basal
Lateral basal
Posterior basal
Lung lobes: One having lingula, lobe numbers
Lingula is on Left
The lingula is like an atrophied lobe, so the left lung
must have two "other" lobes, and, therefore, right lung
has three lobes.
FACTS TO REMEMBER
• Large spongy lungs occupy almost whole of
thoracic cage leaving little space for the heart and
accompanying blood vessels, etc.
• Bronchopulmonary segments are independent
functional units of lung.
• Lungs are subjected to lot of insult by the smoke
of cigarette/bidis/pollution.
• Tuberculosis of lung is one of the commonest killer
in an underdeveloped or a developing country.
Complete treatment of TB is a must, otherwise the
bacteria become resistant to antitubercular treatment.
People harbouring resistant bacteria spread the
disease to people around through their sputum.
--- Page 299 ---
THORAX
Thorax
Section 2
1. Describe the gross anatomy of the lungs. Define a
bronchopulmonary segment. Enumerate the
segments of the lungs. What is the clinical
importance of these segments?
2. Write short notes on:
a. Comparison of the roots of right and left lungs
b. Carina of trachea
c. Postural drainage
d. Effects of parasympathetic nerves on the lung
e. Various subdivisions of a segmental bronchus
f. Intrapulmonary bronchus
CLINICOANATOMICAL PROBLEMS
Case 1
A young boy with sore throat while playing with
small coins, puts 3 coins in his mouth. When asked
by his mother, he takes out two of them, and is not
able to take out one.
• Where is the third coin likely to pass?
• What can be the dangers to the boy?
Ans: Since the boy was having sore throat, it is likely
the coin has been inhaled into his respiratory
passages. The coin would pass down the larynx,
trachea, right principal bronchus, as it is in line with
trachea. The coin further descends into lower lobe
bronchus, and into its posterior basal segment. That
segment of the lung would get blocked, causing
respiratory symptoms.
If the coin goes into oropharynx and oesophagus,
it will comfortably travel down whole of digestive
tract and would come out in the faecal matter next
day.
Case 2
A 45-year-old man complained of severe cough, loss
of weight, alteration of his voice. He has been
smoking for last 25 years. Radiograph of the chest
followed by biopsy revealed bronchogenic car-
cinoma in the left upper lobe of the lung.
• Where did the cancer cells metastasise?
• What caused alteration of his voice?
Ans: The bronchogenic carcinoma spreads to the
bronchomediastinal lymph nodes. The left supra-
clavicular nodes are also enlarged and palpable; so
these are called ‘sentinal nodes’. The enlarged
bronchomediastinal lymph nodes may exert pressure
on the left recurrent laryngeal nerve in the thorax
causing alteration of voice. The cancer of lung is
mostly due to smoking.
FURTHER READING
• Chandrupatla M, Krishnaiah. The study of bronchial tree.
International Journal of Pharma and Biological Sciences
2011;2:166–72.
• Hush A. Asthma research: The real action is in children.
Paediatr Respair Rev 2005;6:101–10.
A review of how early problems with lung growth and development
impact on later lung disease.
• Morrisery EE, Hogan BL. Preparing for the first breath:
Genetic and cellular mechanisms in lung development. Dev
Cell 2010;18:8–23.
This paper presents an overview of the molecular mechanisms of
lung development.
• Ornitz DM, Yoin. Signalling networks regulating
development of the lower respiratory tract. Cold Spring Harb
ZPerspect Biol 2012;1;4.
This paper presents a review of the signaling factors in lung
development.
• Shabana S, Mrudula C. Anatomical variations of pulmonary
veins at the hilum of lung. Int J Applied Research 2017;7:50–
1–4 From Medical Council of India, Competency based Undergraduate Curriculum for the Indian Medical Graduate, 2018;1:44–80.
--- Page 300 ---
LUNGS
Thorax
Section 2
1. Which one of the following structures is not related
to medial surface of right lung?
a. Superior vena cava
b. Thoracic duct
c. Trachea
d. Oesophagus
2. Which of the following structures is single at the
root of each lung?
a. Pulmonary vein
b. Pulmonary artery
c. Bronchus
d. Bronchial artery
3. Which one of the following is not a common relation
to the roots of both lungs?
a. Anterior pulmonary plexus
b. Pericardiacophrenic vessels
c. Superior vena cava
d. Phrenic nerve
4. Part of lung aerated by a respiratory bronchiole is:
a. A lobule
b. A segment
c. Alveolus
d. Pulmonary unit
5. Respiratory bronchiole ends in all microscopic
passages except:
a. Alveolar ducts
b. Atria
c. Pulmonary alveoli
d. Terminal bronchiole
6. The effects of parasympathetic system on lungs are
all, except:
a. Motor to bronchial muscle
b. Secretomotor to mucous glands of bronchial tree
c. Responsible for cough reflex
d. Causes bronchodilation
7. Which of the following structures run in the
intersegmental planes of the lungs?
a. Segmental venules
b. Bronchial vessels
c. Pulmonary arteries
d. Bronchus
8. Order of origin of segmental bronchi in lower lobe
of lung is:
a. Superior, anterior basal, medial basal, lateral
basal and posterior basal
b. Superior, medial basal, anterior basal and lateral
basal and posterior basal
c. Medial basal, superior, anterior basal, lateral
basal and posterior basal
d. Anterior basal, superior, medial basal, lateral
basal and posterior basal
9. Permanent overdistension of alveoli is known as:
a. Empyema
b. Emphysema
c. Pneumothorax
d. Dyspnoea
10. Angles of right and left bronchi at carina are:
a. 20° and 40°
b. 25° and 45°
c. 40° and 40°
d. 45° and 25°
• Name the borders and surfaces of lung.
• Name the structures present in the hilum of right lung.
• What is the function of pulmonary ligament?
• What structure arches above the root of left lung?
• Define a bronchopulmonary segment.
• Where do the cartilage and smooth muscle fibres end
in the bronchial tree?
• Why does the foreign body mostly enter through the
right bronchus?
• Which lobe of lung is auscultated from the posterior
aspect of thoracic cage?
• What is postural drainage?
• Which is the most dependent bronchopulmonary
segment in supine position?
1. b
2. b
3. c
4. d
5. d
6. d
7. a
8. b
9. b
10. b
--- Page 301 ---
THORAX
Thorax
Section 2
Mediastinum
Amitabh Bachhan, the great actor suffered from myasthenia gravis, a disorder of thymus, present in the anterior mediastinum 
—Anonymous
INTRODUCTION
Mediastinum (plural—mediastina) (Latin intermediate)
is the middle space left in the thoracic cavity in between
the lungs. Its most important content is the heart,
enclosed in the pericardium in the middle part of the
inferior mediastinum or the middle mediastinum.
Above it lies superior mediastinum. Anterior and post-
erior to the heart are anterior mediastinum and
posterior mediastinum, respectively.
The mediastinum is the median septum of the thorax
between the two lungs. It includes the mediastinal
pleurae.
Competency achievement: The student should be able to:
AN 21.11 Mention boundaries and contents of the superior,
anterior, middle and posterior mediastinum.1
SUPERIOR AND INFERIOR MEDIASTINA
Boundaries
Anteriorly: Sternum
Posteriorly: Vertebral column
Superiorly: Thoracic inlet
Inferiorly: Diaphragm
On each side: Mediastinal pleura.
Divisions
For descriptive purposes, the mediastinum is divided
into the superior mediastinum and the inferior medi-
astinum. The inferior mediastinum is further divided
into the anterior, middle and posterior mediastina
(Fig. 17.1).
The superior mediastinum is separated from the
inferior by an imaginary plane passing through the
sternal angle anteriorly and the lower border of the
body of the fourth thoracic vertebra posteriorly. The
inferior mediastinum is subdivided into three parts by
the pericardium. The area in front of the pericardium
is the anterior mediastinum. The area behind the
pericardium is the posterior mediastinum. The
pericardium and its contents form the middle medi-
astinum.
DISSECTION
Reflect the upper half of manubrium sterni upwards and
study the boundaries and contents of superior and three
divisions of the inferior mediastinum.
SUPERIOR MEDIASTINUM
Boundaries
Anteriorly: Manubrium sterni (Fig. 17.1)
Posteriorly: Upper four thoracic vertebrae
Superiorly: Plane of the thoracic inlet
Fig. 17.1: Subdivisions of the mediastinum
--- Page 302 ---
MEDIASTINUM
Thorax
Section 2
Inferiorly: An imaginary plane passing through the
sternal angle in front, and the lower border of the body
of the fourth thoracic vertebra behind.
On each side: Mediastinal pleura.
Contents
1 Trachea and oesophagus
2 Muscles: Origins of (i) sternohyoid, (ii) sterno-
thyroid, (iii) lower ends of longus colli.
3 Arteries: (i) Arch of aorta, (ii) brachiocephalic artery,
(iii) left common carotid artery, (iv) left subclavian
artery (Fig. 17.2).
4 Veins: (i) Right and left brachiocephalic veins,
(ii) upper half of the superior vena cava, (iii) left
superior intercostal vein.
5 Nerves: (i) Vagus, (ii) phrenic, (iii) cardiac nerves of
both sides, (iv) left recurrent laryngeal nerve.
6 Thymus
7 Thoracic duct
8 Lymph nodes: Paratracheal, brachiocephalic, and
tracheobronchial.
superior mediastinum with the pretracheal space of the
neck. It contains areolar tissue and part of thymus gland.
Boundaries
Anteriorly: Body of sternum
Posteriorly: Pericardium
Superiorly: Imaginary plane separating the superior
mediastinum from the inferior mediastinum.
Inferiorly: Superior surface of diaphragm
On each side: Mediastinal pleura
Contents
1 Sternopericardial ligaments (Fig. 17.1)
2 Lymph nodes with lymphatics
3 Small mediastinal branches of the internal thoracic
artery
4 The lowest part of the thymus
5 Areolar tissue.
Middle Mediastinum
Middle mediastinum is occupied by the pericardium
and its contents, along with the phrenic nerves and the
pericardiacophrenic vessels.
Boundaries
Anteriorly: Sternopericardial ligaments
Posteriorly: Oesophagus, descending thoracic aorta,
azygos vein (see Figs 15.2 and 15.3)
On each side: Mediastinal pleura
Contents
1 Heart enclosed in pericardium (Fig. 17.2)
2 Arteries: (i) Ascending aorta, (ii) pulmonary trunk,
(iii) two pulmonary arteries (Fig. 17.3)
INFERIOR MEDIASTINUM
The inferior mediastinum is divided into—anterior,
middle and posterior mediastina.
Anterior Mediastinum
Anterior mediastinum is a very narrow space in front
of the pericardium, overlapped by the thin anterior
borders of both lungs. It is continuous through the
Fig. 17.3: Some structures present in superior, middle and
posterior mediastina
Fig. 17.2: Arrangement of the large structures in the superior
mediastinum. Note the relationship of superior vena cava,
ascending aorta and pulmonary trunk to each other in the middle
mediastinum, i.e. within the pericardium. The bronchi are not shown
--- Page 303 ---
THORAX
Thorax
Section 2
3 Veins: (i) Lower half of the superior vena cava,
(ii) terminal part of the azygos vein, and (iii) right
and left pulmonary veins.
4 Nerves: (i) Phrenic, and (ii) deep cardiac plexus.
5 Lymph nodes: Tracheobronchial nodes.
Posterior Mediastinum
Boundaries
Anteriorly: (i) Pericardium, (ii) bifurcation of trachea,
(iii) pulmonary vessels, and (iv) posterior part of the
upper surface of the diaphragm.
Posteriorly: Lower eight thoracic vertebrae and
intervening discs.
On each side: Mediastinal pleura.
Contents
1 Oesophagus (Fig. 17.4).
2 Arteries: Descending thoracic aorta and its branches.
3 Veins: (i) Azygos vein, (ii) hemiazygos vein,
and (iii) accessory hemiazygos vein.
4 Nerves: (i) Vagi, (ii) splanchnic nerves, greater, lesser
and least, arising from the lower eight thoracic
ganglia of the sympathetic chain (see Fig. 15.1).
5 Lymph nodes and lymphatics:
a. Posterior mediastinal lymph nodes lying along-
side the aorta.
b. The thoracic duct (Fig. 17.4).
CLINICAL ANATOMY
• The prevertebral layer of the deep cervical fascia
extends to the superior mediastinum, and is
attached to the fourth thoracic vertebra. An
infection present in the neck behind this fascia can
pass down into the superior mediastinum but not
lower down.
The pretracheal fascia of the neck also extends to
the superior mediastinum, where it blends with
the arch of the aorta. Neck infections between the
pretracheal and prevertebral fasciae can spread
into the superior mediastinum, and through it into
the posterior mediastinum. Thus mediastinitis can
result from infections in the neck.
• There is very little loose connective tissue between
the mobile organs of the mediastinum. Therefore,
the space can be readily dilated by inflammatory
fluids, neoplasms, etc.
• In the superior mediastinum, all large veins
are on the right side and the arteries on the left
side. During increased blood flow, veins expand
enormously, while the large arteries do not expand
at all. Thus there is much ‘dead space’ on the
right side and it is into this space that tumour
or fluids of the mediastinum tend to project
(Fig. 17.5).
• Compression of mediastinal structures by any
tumour gives rise to a group of symptoms known
as mediastinal syndrome. The common symptoms
are as follows:
a Obstruction of superior vena cava gives rise to
engorgement of veins in the upper half of the
body.
b. Pressure over the trachea causes dyspnoea, and
cough.
c. Pressure on oesophagus causes dysphagia.
d. Pressure or the left recurrent laryngeal nerve
gives rise to hoarseness of voice (dysphonia).
e. Pressure on the phrenic nerve causes paralysis
of the diaphragm on that side.
f. Pressure on the intercostal nerves gives rise to
pain in the area supplied by them. It is called
intercostal neuralgia.
Fig. 17.4: Structures in the posterior part of the superior media-
stinum, and their continuation into the posterior mediastinum.
Note the relationship of the arch of the aorta to the left bronchus,
and that of the azygos vein to the right bronchus
--- Page 304 ---
MEDIASTINUM
Thorax
Section 2
g. Pressure on the vertebral column may cause
erosion of the vertebral bodies.
The common causes of mediastinal syndrome are
bronchogenic carcinoma, Hodgkin’s disease causing
enlargement of the mediastinal lymph nodes,
aneurysm or dilatation of the aorta, etc.
Mnemonics
Superior mediastinum contents: PVT Left
BATTLE
Phrenic nerve
Vagus nerve
Thoracic duct
Left recurrent laryngeal nerve (not the right)
Brachiocephalic veins
Aortic arch (and its 3 branches)
Thymus
Trachea
Lymph nodes
Esophagus
"BATS AND TENT"
Brachiocephalic veins
Arch of aorta
Thymus
Superior vena cava
Trachea
Esophagus
Nerves (vagus and phrenic)
Thoracic duct
FACTS TO REMEMBER
• Mediastinum is the middle space between the
lungs.
• It is chiefly occupied by the heart enclosed in
pericardium with blood vessels and nerves.
• Unit structures in the superior mediastinum are
trachea, oesophagus, left recurrent laryngeal nerve
between the two tubes and thoracic duct on the
left of the oesophagus.
CLINICOANATOMICAL PROBLEM
A patient presents with lots of dilated veins in the
front of chest and anterior thoracic wall.
• What is the reason for so many veins seen on
the anterior body wall?
• How does venous blood go back in circulation?
Ans: This appears to be a case of blockage of superior
vena cava after the entry of vena azygos. The blood
needs to return to heart and it is done through
inferior vena cava. The backflow occurs:
Superior vena cava blockagebrachiocephalic
veinssubclavian veinsaxillary veinslateral
thoracic veinsthoracoepigastric veins
superficial epigastric veinsgreat saphenous veins
femoral veinscommon iliac veinsinferior
vena cavaright atrium of heart (see Fig. 14.6).
Many veins open up to assist the drainage.
Fig. 17.5: Large vessels in relation to heart
1 From Medical Council of India, Competency based Undergraduate Curriculum for the Indian Medical Graduate, 2018;1:44–80.
--- Page 305 ---
THORAX
Thorax
Section 2
1. Enumerate the boundaries and contents of superior
mediastinum.
2. Enumerate the boundaries of mediastinum and its
subdivisions.
3. Enumerate:
a. Contents of middle mediastinum
b. Contents of posterior mediastinum
1. Boundaries of mediastinum are all, except:
a. Sternum
b. Cervical vertebrae
c. Thoracic inlet
d. Diaphragm
2. Inferior mediastinum is divided into:
a. Anterior
b. Middle
c. Posterior
d. Posteroinferior
3. Contents of middle mediastinum are all, except:
a. Heart with pericardium
b. Pulmonary arteries
c. Upper half of superior vena cava
d. Bifurcation of trachea
4. Which one is not a content of superior media-
stinum?
a. Arch of aorta
b. Lower half of superior
vena cava
c. Trachea
d. Oesophagus
5. Which one is not a content of posterior media-
stinum?
a. Oesophagus
b. Descending thoracic aorta
c. Arch of vena
d. Vagus nerve
azygos
1. b
2. d
3. c
4. b
5. c
• Name the boundaries of superior mediastinum.
• Name the contents of superior mediastinum.
• What are the contents of middle mediastinum?
• What are the contents of posterior mediastinum?
• Which are the ‘unit structures’ in the superior
mediastinum?
--- Page 306 ---
Pericardium and Heart
INTRODUCTION
Pericardium, comprising fibrous and serous layers,
encloses the heart pulsating from ‘womb to tomb’.
Heart is a vital organ, pumping blood to the entire
body (Figs 18.1 and 18.2). Its pulsations are governed
by the brain through various nerves. Since heartbeat is
felt or seen against the chest wall, it appears to be more
active than the ‘quiet brain’ controlling it. That is why
there are so many songs on the heart and few on the
brain. Meditation, yoga and exercise help in regulating
the heartbeat through the brain.
Competency achievement: The student should be able to:
AN 22.1 Describe and demonstrate subdivisions, sinuses in
pericardium, blood supply and nerve supply of pericardium.1
PERICARDIUM
Features
The pericardium (Greek around heart) is a fibroserous
sac which encloses the heart and the roots of the great
vessels. It is situated in the middle mediastinum. It
consists of the fibrous pericardium and the serous
pericardium (Figs 18.1b and 18.2).
Fibrous pericardium encloses the heart and fuses with
the vessels which enter/leave the heart. Heart is situated
within the fibrous and serous pericardial sacs. As heart
develops, it invaginates itself into the serous sac, without
causing any breach in its continuity. The last part to enter
is the region of atria, from where the visceral pericardium
is reflected as the parietal pericardium. Thus parietal
layer of serous pericardium gets adherent to the inner
surface of fibrous pericardium, while the visceral layer
of serous pericardium gets adherent to the outer layer
of heart and forms its epicardium.
When there is room in the heart, there is room in the house 
—Anonymous
Figs 18.1a and b: (a) Lines of incision, and (b) layers of the pericardium
--- Page 307 ---
THORAX
Thorax
Section 2
5 On each side, it is related to the mediastinal pleura,
the mediastinal surface of the lung, the phrenic nerve,
and the pericardiacophrenic vessels.
6 It protects the heart against sudden overfilling and
prevents overexpansion of the heart.
SEROUS PERICARDIUM
Serous pericardium is thin, double-layered serous
membrane lined by mesothelium. The outer layer or
parietal pericardium is fused with the fibrous peri-
cardium. The inner layer or the visceral pericardium,
or epicardium is fused to the heart, except along the
cardiac grooves, where it is separated from the heart
by blood vessels. The two layers are continuous with
each other at the roots of the great vessels, i.e. ascending
aorta, pulmonary trunk, two venae cavae, and four pul-
monary veins.
The pericardial cavity is a potential space between the
parietal pericardium and the visceral pericardium. It
contains only a thin film of serous fluid which lubricates
the apposed surfaces and allows the heart to beat
smoothly.
Sinuses of Pericardium
The epicardium at the roots of the great vessels is
arranged in form of two tubes. The arterial tube
encloses the ascending aorta and the pulmonary trunk
at the arterial end of the heart tube, and the venous
tube encloses the venae cavae and pulmonary veins at
the venous end of the heart tube. The passage between
the two tubes is known as the transverse sinus of
pericardium. During development, to begin with, the
veins of the heart are crowded together. As the heart
increases in size and these veins separate out, a
pericardial reflection surrounds all of them and forms
the oblique pericardial sinus. This cul-de-sac is posterior
to the left atrium (Fig. 18.4).
The transverse sinus is a horizontal gap between the
arterial and venous ends of the heart tube. It is bounded
anteriorly by the ascending aorta and pulmonary trunk,
and posteriorly by the superior vena cava and inferiorly
by the left atrium; on each side, it opens into the general
pericardial cavity (Fig. 18.5). It develops from
degeneration of the central part of dorsal mesocardium.
The oblique sinus is a narrow gap behind the heart. It
is bounded anteriorly by the left atrium, and posteriorly
by the parietal pericardium and oesophagus. On the
right and left sides, it is bounded by reflections of
pericardium as shown in Fig. 18.5. Below and to the
left, it opens into the rest of the pericardial cavity. The
oblique sinus permits pulsations of the left atrium to
take place freely (Figs 18.4 and 18.5). It develops due
to rearrangement of veins at the venous end.
Fig. 18.2: Development of the layers of serous pericardium
Fig. 18.3: The relations of the fibrous pericardium to the roots
of the great vessels, the diaphragm and the sternum
FIBROUS PERICARDIUM
Fibrous pericardium is a conical sac made up of fibrous
tissue. The parietal layer of serous pericardium is
attached to its deep surface. The following features of
the fibrous pericardium are noteworthy.
1 The apex is blunt and lies at the level of the sternal
angle. It is fused with the roots of the great vessels
and with the pretracheal fascia.
2 The base is broad and inseparably blended with the
central tendon of the diaphragm.
3 Anteriorly, it is connected to the upper and lower
ends of body of the sternum by weak superior and
inferior sternopericardial ligaments (Fig. 18.3).
4 Posteriorly, it is related to the principal bronchi, the
oesophagus with the nerve plexus around it and the
descending thoracic aorta.
--- Page 308 ---
PERICARDIUM AND HEART
Thorax
Section 2
Contents of Pericardium
1 Heart with cardiac vessels and nerves
2 Ascending aorta
3 Pulmonary trunk
4 Lower half of the superior vena cava
5 Terminal part of the inferior vena cava
6 The terminal parts of the pulmonary veins
Blood Supply
The fibrous and parietal pericardia are supplied by
branches from:
1 Internal thoracic arteries
2 Musculophrenic arteries
3 The descending thoracic aorta
4 Veins drain into corresponding veins
Nerve Supply
The fibrous and parietal pericardia are supplied by the
phrenic nerves. They are sensitive to pain. The
epicardium is supplied by autonomic nerves of the
heart and is not sensitive to pain. Pain of pericarditis
originates in the parietal pericardium alone. On the
other hand, cardiac pain or angina originates in the
cardiac muscle or in the vessels of the heart.
Development
Fibrous pericardium develops from septum transversum.
DISSECTION
Make a vertical cut through each side of the pericardium
immediately anterior to the line of the phrenic nerve.
Join the lower ends of these two incisions by a trans-
verse cut approximately 1 cm above the diaphragm.
Turn the flap of pericardium upwards and sideways to
examine the pericardial cavity. See that the turned flap
comprises fibrous and parietal layer of visceral
pericardium. The pericardium enclosing the heart is its
visceral layer (Figs 18.2 and 18.3) (refer to BDC App).
Pass a probe from the right side behind the
ascending aorta and pulmonary trunk till it appears on
the left just to the right of left atrium. This probe is in the
transverse sinus of the pericardium (Fig. 18.4).
Lift the apex of the heart upwards. Put a finger behind
the left atrium into a cul-de-sac, bounded to the right
and below by inferior vena cava and above and to left
by lower left pulmonary vein. This is the oblique sinus
of pericardium.
Define the borders, surfaces, grooves, apex and base
of the heart.
CLINICAL ANATOMY
• Collection of fluid in the pericardial cavity is
referred to as pericardial effusion (Fig. 18.6) or
Fig. 18.5: Transverse section through the upper part of the heart.
Note that oblique sinus forms posterior boundary of left atrium
Fig. 18.4: The pericardial cavity seen after removal of the heart.
Note the reflections of pericardium, and the mode of formation
of the transverse and oblique sinuses
Fig. 18.6: Drainage of pericardial effusion
--- Page 309 ---
THORAX
Thorax
Section 2
cardiac tamponade. The fluid compresses the
heart and restricts venous filling during diastole.
It also reduces cardiac output. Pericardial effusion
can be drained by puncturing the left fifth or sixth
intercostal space just lateral to the sternum, or in
the angle between the xiphoid process and left
costal margin, with the needle directed upwards,
backwards and to the left (Fig. 18.6).
• In mitral stenosis, left atrium enlarges and com-
presses the oesophagus causing dysphagia.
• During heart surgery, the ligature is passed
through the transverse sinus around aorta and the
pulmonary trunk.
HEART
The heart is a conical hollow muscular organ situated
in the middle mediastinum. It is enclosed within the
pericardium. It pumps blood to various parts of the
body to meet their nutritive requirements. The Greek
name for the heart is cardia from which we have the
adjective cardiac. The Latin name for the heart is cor
from which we have the adjective coronary.
The heart is placed obliquely behind the body of the
sternum and adjoining parts of the costal cartilages, so
that one-third of it lies to the right and two-thirds to
the left of the median plane. The direction of blood flow,
from atria to the ventricles is downwards, forwards and
to the left. The heart measures about 12 × 9 cm and
weighs about 300 g in males and 250 g in females.
EXTERNAL FEATURES
The human heart has four chambers. These are the right
and left atria and the right and left ventricles. The atria
(Latin chamber) lie above and behind the ventricles. On
the surface of the heart, they are separated from the
ventricles by an atrioventricular groove. The atria are
separated from each other by an interatrial groove. The
ventricles are separated from each other by an
interventricular groove, which is subdivided into
anterior and posterior parts (Fig. 18.7). The heart has:
• An apex directed downwards, forwards and to
the left.
• A base (posterior surface) directed backwards
• Three surfaces—anterior/sternocostal, inferior
and left lateral
• Borders: The surfaces are demarcated by upper,
inferior, right and left borders.
For surface marking, see Fig. 21.5.
Grooves or Sulci
The atria are separated from the ventricles by a circular
atrioventricular or coronary sulcus, which is divided into
anterior and posterior parts. Anterior part consists of
right and left halves. Right half is oblique between right
auricle and right ventricle, lodging right coronary
artery. Left part is small between left auricle and left
ventricle, lodges circumflex branch of left coronary
artery.
The coronary sulcus is overlapped anteriorly by the
ascending aorta and the pulmonary trunk. The inter-
atrial groove is faintly visible posteriorly, while ante-
riorly, it is hidden by the aorta and pulmonary trunk.
The anterior interventricular groove is nearer to the left
margin of the heart. It runs downwards and to the left.
The lower end of the groove separates the apex from
the rest of the inferior border of the heart. The posterior
interventricular groove is situated on the diaphragmatic
or inferior surface of the heart. It is nearer to the right
margin of this surface (Figs 18.8a and b). The two inter-
ventricular grooves meet at the inferior border near the
apex.
Apex of the Heart
Apex of the heart is formed entirely by the left ventricle.
It is directed downwards, forwards and to the left and
is overlapped by the anterior border of the left lung. It
is situated in the left fifth intercostal space 9 cm lateral
to the midsternal line just medial to the midclavicular
line. In the living subject, pulsations may be seen and
felt over this region (Fig. 18.7).
In children below 2 years, apex is situated in the left
fourth intercostal space in midclavicular line.
CLINICAL ANATOMY
Normally, the cardiac apex or apex beat is on the
left side. In the condition called dextrocardia, the
apex is on the right side (Fig. 18.9). Dextrocardia may
Fig. 18.7: Gross features: Sternocostal surface of heart
--- Page 310 ---
PERICARDIUM AND HEART
Thorax
Section 2
Figs 18.8a and b: The posterior base and inferior surface of the heart
Fig. 18.9: Dextrocardia
be part of a condition called situs inversus in which
all thoracic and abdominal viscera are a mirror image
of normal.
Base of the Heart
The base of the heart is also called its posterior surface.
It is formed mainly by the left atrium and by a small
part of the right atrium.
In relation to the base, one can see the openings of
four pulmonary veins which open into the left atrium;
and of the superior and inferior venae cavae (Latin,
empty vein) which open into the right atrium. It is related
to thoracic five to thoracic eight vertebrae in the lying
posture, and descends by one vertebra in the erect
posture. It is separated from the vertebral column by
the pericardium, the right pulmonary veins, the
oesophagus and the aorta (see Figs 15.3 and 17.2).
Borders of the Heart
1 The upper border is slightly oblique, and is formed
by the two atria, chiefly the left atrium.
2 The right border is more or less vertical and is formed
by the right atrium. It extends from superior vena
cava to inferior vena cava (IVC).
3 The inferior border is nearly horizontal and is formed
mainly by the right ventricle. A small part of it near
the apex is formed by left ventricle. It extends from
IVC to apex.
4 The left border is oblique and curved. It is formed
mainly by the left ventricle, and partly by the left
auricle. It separates the anterior and left surfaces of
the heart (Fig. 18.7). It extends from apex to left
auricle.
Surfaces of the Heart
The anterior or sternocostal surface is formed mainly by
the right atrium and right ventricle, and partly by the
left ventricle and left auricle (Fig. 18.7). The left atrium
is not seen on the anterior surface as it is covered by
the aorta and pulmonary trunk. Most of the sternocostal
surface is covered by the lungs, but a part of it that lies
behind the cardiac notch of the left lung is uncovered.
The uncovered area is dull on percussion. Clinically, it
is referred to as the area of superficial cardiac dullness.
The inferior or diaphragmatic surface rests on the
central tendon of the diaphragm. It is formed in its left
two-thirds by the left ventricle, and in its right one-
third by the right ventricle. It is traversed by the
--- Page 311 ---
THORAX
Thorax
Section 2
Table 18.1: Comparing the systemic circulation and pulmonary circulation
Systemic circulation
Pulmonary circulation
Left ventricle
Right ventricle
Aortic valve
Pulmonary valve
Aorta
Pulmonary trunk and pulmonary arteries
Oxygenated blood to all tissues except lungs
Only to lungs
Venous blood collected
Deoxygenated blood gets oxygenated
Superior and inferior venae cavae
4 pulmonary veins
Right atrium
Left atrium
to the left side. Similarly cut along its lower edge by an
incision extending from the anterior end of the inferior
vena caval opening to the left side. Incise the anterior
wall of the right atrium near its left margin and reflect the
flap to the right (Fig. 18.10) (Refer to BDC App).
On its internal surface, see the vertical crista
terminalis and horizontal pectinate muscles.
The fossa ovalis is on the interatrial septum and the
opening of the coronary sinus is to the left of the inferior
vena caval opening.
Define the three cusps of tricuspid valve.
External Features
1 The chamber is elongated vertically, receiving the
superior vena cava at the upper end and the inferior
vena cava at the lower end (Fig. 18.11).
2 The upper end is prolonged to the left to form the
right auricle (Latin little ear). The auricle covers the
root of the ascending aorta and partly overlaps the
infundibulum of the right ventricle. Its margins are
notched and the interior is sponge-like, which
prevents free flow of blood.
3 Along the right border of the atrium, there is a
shallow vertical groove which passes from the
superior vena cava to the inferior vena cava. This
groove is called the sulcus terminalis. It is produced
by an internal muscular ridge called the crista
terminalis (Fig. 18.11a). The upper part of the sulcus
contains the sinuatrial or SA node which acts as the
pacemaker of the heart.
4 The right atrioventricular groove separates the right
atrium from the right ventricle. It is more or less
vertical and lodges the right coronary artery and the
small cardiac vein.
posterior interventricular groove, and is directed
downwards and slightly backwards (Fig. 18.8).
The left surface is formed mostly by the left ventricle,
and at the upper end by the left auricle. In its upper
part, the surface is crossed by the coronary sulcus. It is
related to the left phrenic nerve, the left peri-
cardiacophrenic vessels and the pericardium.
Crux of the Heart
Crux of the heart is the meeting point of interatrial,
atrioventricular and posterior interventricular grooves.
Types of Circulation
There are two main types of circulations—systemic and
pulmonary. Table 18.1 shows their comparison.
Competency achievement: The student should be able to:
AN 22.2 Describe and demonstrate external and internal features
of each chamber of heart.2
RIGHT ATRIUM
Position
The right atrium is the right upper chamber of the heart.
It receives venous blood from the whole body, pumps
it to the right ventricle through the right atrioventricular
or tricuspid opening. It forms the right border, part of
the upper border, the sternocostal surface and the base
of the heart (Fig. 18.7).
DISSECTION
Cut along the upper edge of the right auricle by an incision
from the anterior end of the superior vena caval opening
--- Page 312 ---
PERICARDIUM AND HEART
Thorax
Section 2
Tributaries or Inlets of the Right Atrium
1 Superior vena cava
2 Inferior vena cava
3 Coronary sinus
4 Anterior cardiac veins
5 Venae cordis minimae (thebesian veins)
6 Sometimes the right marginal vein
Right Atrioventricular Orifice
Blood passes out of the right atrium through the right
atrioventricular or tricuspid orifice and goes to the right
ventricle. The tricuspid orifice is guarded by the
tricuspid valve which maintains unidirectional flow of
blood (Fig. 18.11b).
Internal Features
The interior of the right atrium can be broadly divided
into the following three parts:
Fig. 18.10: External features of heart: (1) Line of incision for right atrium, (2) for right ventricle, and (3) for left ventricle
Fig. 18.11a: Interior of right atrium (cut along sulcus terminalis)
--- Page 313 ---
THORAX
Thorax
Section 2
Smooth Posterior Part or Sinus Venarum
1 Developmentally, it is derived from the right horn
of the sinus venosus.
2 Most of the tributaries except the anterior cardiac
veins open into it.
a The superior vena cava opens at the upper end.
b The inferior vena cava opens at the lower end
(Fig. 18.11a).
The opening of inferior vena cava is guarded
by a rudimentary valve of the inferior vena cava
or Eustachian valve. During embryonic life, the
valve guides the inferior vena caval blood to the
left atrium through the foramen ovale.
c. The coronary sinus opens between the opening of
the inferior vena cava and the right atrioven-
tricular orifice. The opening is guarded by the valve
of the coronary sinus or thebesian valve.
d. The venae cordis minimae are numerous small veins
present in the walls of all the four chambers. They
open into the right atrium through small foramina.
3 The intervenous tubercle of Lower is a very small pro-
jection, scarcely visible, on the posterior wall of the
atrium just below the opening of the superior vena
cava. During embryonic life, it directs the superior
caval blood to the right ventricle.
Rough Anterior Part or Pectinate Part,
including the Auricle
1 Developmentally, it is derived from the primitive
atrial chamber.
2 It presents a series of transverse muscular ridges
called musculi pectinati (Figs 18.11a and b).
They arise from the crista terminalis and run for-
wards and downwards towards the atrioventricular
orifice, giving the appearance of the teeth of a comb. In
the auricle, the muscles are interconnected to form a
reticular network.
Interatrial Septum
1 Developmentally, it is derived from the septum
primum and septum secundum.
2 It presents the fossa ovalis, a shallow saucer-shaped
depression, in the lower part. The fossa represents
the site of the embryonic septum primum.
3 The annulus ovalis or limbus (Latin a border) fossa ovalis
is the prominent margin of the fossa ovalis. It
represents the lower free edge of the septum
secundum. It is distinct above and at the sides of the
fossa ovalis, but is deficient inferiorly. Its anterior
edge is continuous with the left end of the valve of
the inferior vena cava.
4 The remains of the foramen ovale are occasionally
present. This is a small slit-like valvular opening
between the upper part of the fossa and the limbus. It
is normally occluded after birth, but may sometimes
persist.
RIGHT VENTRICLE
Position
The right ventricle is a triangular chamber which
receives blood from the right atrium and pumps it to
the lungs through the pulmonary trunk and pulmonary
arteries. It forms the inferior border and two-thirds part
of the sternocostal surface and one-third part of inferior
surface of the heart (Fig. 18.7).
Fig. 18.11b: Interior of right atrium (cut along coronary sulcus)
--- Page 314 ---
PERICARDIUM AND HEART
Thorax
Section 2
External Features
1. Externally, the right ventricle has two surfaces—
anterior or sternocostal and inferior or diaphragmatic.
2. The interior has two parts:
a. The inflowing part is rough due to the presence of
muscular ridges called trabeculae carneae. It
develops from the proximal part of bulbus cordis
of the heart tube.
b. The outflowing part or infundibulum is smooth
and forms the upper conical part of the right
ventricle which gives rise to the pulmonary trunk.
It develops from the midportion of the bulbus
cordis.
The two parts are separated by a muscular ridge called
the supraventricular crest or infundibuloventricular crest
situated between the tricuspid and pulmonary orifices.
Internal Features
1 The interior shows two orifices:
a The right atrioventricular or tricuspid orifice,
guarded by the tricuspid valve.
b. The pulmonary orifice guarded by the pulmonary
valve (Figs 18.12a and b).
2 The interior of the inflowing part shows trabeculae
carneae or muscular ridges of three types:
a. Ridges or fixed elevations
b. Bridges
c. Pillars or papillary muscles with one end attached
to the ventricular wall, and the other end
connected to the cusps of the tricuspid valve by
chordae tendineae (Latin strings to stretch). There
are three papillary muscles in the right ventricle—
anterior, posterior and septal. The anterior muscle
is the largest (Fig. 18.12). The posterior or inferior
muscle is small and irregular. The septal muscle is
divided into a number of little nipples. Each papillary
muscle is attached by chordae tendineae to the
contiguous sides of two cusps (Fig. 18.13).
3 The septomarginal trabecula or moderator band is a
muscular ridge extending from the ventricular
septum to the base of the anterior papillary muscle.
It contains the right branch of the AV bundle
(Figs 18.12 and 18.14).
4 The cavity of the right ventricle is crescentic in section
because of the forward bulge of the interventricular
septum (Fig. 18.15).
5 The wall of the right ventricle is thinner than that of
the left ventricle in a ratio of 1:3.
Interventricular Septum
The septum is placed obliquely. Its one surface faces
forwards and to the right and the other faces backwards
Fig. 18.12a and b: Interior of the right ventricle. Note the moderator band and the supraventricular crest
Fig. 18.13: Structure of an atrioventricular valve
--- Page 315 ---
THORAX
Thorax
Section 2
Fig. 18.15: Schematic transverse section through the ventricles of the heart showing the atrioventricular orifices, papillary muscles,
and the pulmonary and aortic orifices
and to the left. The upper part of the septum is thin and
membranous and separates not only the two ventricles
but also the right atrium and left ventricle. The lower
part is thick muscular and separates the two ventricles
(Fig. 18.15). Its position is indicated by the anterior and
posterior interventricular grooves.
DISSECTION
Incise along the ventricular aspect of right AV groove,
till you reach the inferior border. Continue to incise
along the inferior border till the inferior end of anterior
interventricular groove. Next cut along the infundibulum.
Now the anterior wall of right ventricle is reflected to
the left to study its interior (Fig. 18.10) (Refer to BDC App).
LEFT ATRIUM
Position
The left atrium is a quadrangular chamber situated
posteriorly. Its appendage, the left auricle projects
anteriorly to overlap the infundibulum of the right
ventricle. The left atrium forms the left two-thirds of
the base of the heart, the greater part of the upper
border, parts of the sternocostal and left surfaces and
the left border. It receives oxygenated blood from the
lungs through four pulmonary veins, and pumps it to
the left ventricle through the left atrioventricular or
bicuspid (Latin two tooth point) or mitral orifice (Latin
like bishop’s mitre) which is guarded by the valve of the
same name.
Features
1 The posterior surface of the atrium forms the anterior
wall of the oblique sinus of pericardium (Fig. 18.5).
2 The anterior wall of the atrium is formed by the
interatrial septum.
3 Two pulmonary veins open into the atrium on each
side of the posterior wall (Fig. 18.8).
4 The greater part of the interior of the atrium is smooth
walled. It is derived embryologically from the
Fig. 18.14: The conducting system of the heart
--- Page 316 ---
PERICARDIUM AND HEART
Thorax
Section 2
absorbed pulmonary veins which open into it.
Musculi pectinati are present only in the auricle where
they form a reticulum. This part develops from the
original primitive atrial chamber of the heart tube.
The septal wall shows the fossa lunata corresponding
to the fossa ovalis of the right atrium. In addition to
the four pulmonary veins, the tributaries of the atrium
include a few venae cordis minimae.
Table 18.2 compares the right atrium and the left
atrium.
DISSECTION
Cut off the pulmonary trunk and ascending aorta,
immediately above the three cusps of the pulmonary
and aortic valves. Remove the upper part of the left
atrium to visualise its interior (Fig. 18.8). See the upper
surface of the cusps of the mitral valve. Revise the fact
that left atrium forms the anterior wall of the oblique
sinus of the pericardium (Fig. 18.5) (refer to BDC App).
LEFT VENTRICLE
Position
The left ventricle receives oxygenated blood from the
left atrium and pumps it into the aorta. It forms the
apex of the heart, a part of the sternocostal surface, most
of the left border and left surface, and the left two-thirds
of the diaphragmatic surface (Figs 18.7 and 18.8).
Features
1 Externally, the left ventricle has three surfaces—
anterior or sternocostal, inferior or diaphragmatic,
and left.
2 The interior is divisible into two parts:
a. The lower rough part with trabeculae carneae
develops from the primitive ventricle of the heart
tube (Fig. 18.16).
b. The upper smooth part or aortic vestibule gives
origin to the ascending aorta: It develops from the
Table 18.2: Comparison of right atrium and left atrium
Right atrium
Left atrium
Receives venous blood of the body
Receives oxygenated blood from lungs
Pushes blood to right ventricle through tricuspid valve
Pushes blood to left ventricle through bicuspid valve
Forms right border, part of sternocostal and
Forms major part of base of the heart
small part of base of the heart
Enlarged in tricuspid stenosis
Enlarged in mitral stenosis
Figs 18.16a and b: Interior of left atrium and left ventricle
--- Page 317 ---
THORAX
Thorax
Section 2
midportion of the bulbus cordis. The vestibule lies
between the membranous part of the inter-
ventricular septum and the anterior or aortic cusp
of the mitral valve.
3 The interior of the ventricle shows two orifices:
a. The left atrioventricular or bicuspid or mitral
orifice, guarded by the bicuspid or mitral valve.
b. The aortic orifice, guarded by the aortic valve
(Fig. 18.15).
4 There are two well-developed papillary muscles—
anterior and posterior. Chordae tendineae from both
muscles are attached to both the cusps of the mitral
valve.
5 The cavity of the left ventricle is circular in cross-
section (Fig. 18.15).
6 The walls of the left ventricle are three times thicker
than those of the right ventricle.
Table 18.3 compares the right ventricle and the left
ventricle.
DISSECTION
Open the left ventricle by making a bold incision on the
ventricular aspect of atrioventricular groove below left
auricle and along whole thickness of left ventricle from
above downwards till its apex. Curve the incision
towards right till the inferior end of anterior inter-
ventricular groove. Reflect the flap to the right and clean
the atrioventricular and aortic valves (Fig. 18.10).
Remove the surface layers of the myocardium. Note
the general directions of its fibres and the depth of the
coronary sulcus, the wall of the atrium passing deep to the
bulging ventricular muscle. Dissect the musculature and
the conducting system of the heart (refer to BDC App).
CLINICAL ANATOMY
• The area of the chest wall overlying the heart is
called the precordium.
• Rapid pulse or increased heart rate is called
tachycardia (Greek rapid heart).
• Slow pulse or decreased heart rate is called
bradycardia (Greek slow heart).
• Irregular pulse or irregular heart rate is called
arrhythmia.
• Consciousness of one’s heartbeat is called
palpitation.
• Inflammation of the heart can involve more than
one layer of the heart. Inflammation of the
pericardium is called pericarditis; of the myo-
cardium is myocarditis; and of the endocardium is
endocarditis.
• Normally, the diastolic pressure in ventricles is
zero. A positive diastolic pressure in the ventricle
is evidence of its failure. Any one of the four
chambers of the heart can fail separately, but
ultimately the rising back pressure causes right-
sided failure (congestive cardiac failure or CCF)
which is associated with increased venous
pressure, oedema on feet, and breathlessness on
exertion. Heart failure (right sided) due to lung
disease is known as cor pulmonale.
STRUCTURE OF HEART
VALVES
The valves of the heart maintain unidirectional flow
of the blood and prevent its regurgitation in the
opposite direction. There are two pairs of valves in
the heart, a pair of atrioventricular valves and a pair
of semilunar valves. The right atrioventricular valve
is known as the tricuspid valve because it has three
cusps. The left atrioventricular valve is known as the
bicuspid valve because it has two cusps. It is also called
the mitral valve. The semilunar valves include the
aortic and pulmonary valves, each having three
semilunar cusps. The cusps are folds of endocardium,
strengthened by an intervening layer of fibrous tissue
(Figs 18.17a and b).
Table 18.3: Comparison of right ventricle and left ventricle
Right ventricle
Left ventricle
Thinner than left, one-third thickness of
Much thicker than right, 3 times thicker than right
left ventricle
ventricle
Pushes blood only to the lungs
Pushes blood to top of the body and down to the toes
Contains three small papillary muscles
Contains two strong papillary muscles
Cavity is crescentic
Cavity is circular
Contains deoxygenated blood
Contains oxygenated blood
Forms two-thirds sternocostal and one-third
Forms one-third sternocostal and two-thirds diaphragmatic
diaphragmatic surfaces
surfaces
--- Page 318 ---
PERICARDIUM AND HEART
Thorax
Section 2
Atrioventricular Valves
1 Both valves are made up of the following com-
ponents.
a. A fibrous ring to which the cusps are attached
(Fig. 18.13).
b. The cusps are flat and project into the ventricular
cavity. Each cusp has an attached and a free
margin, and an atrial and a ventricular surface.
The atrial surface is smooth (Fig. 18.16). The free
margins and ventricular surfaces are rough and
irregular due to the attachment of chordae
tendineae. The valves are closed during ventricular
systole (Greek contraction) by apposition of the atrial
surfaces near the serrated margins (Fig. 18.15).
c. The chordae tendineae connect the free margins and
ventricular surfaces of the cusps to the apices of the
papillary muscles. They prevent eversion of the
free margins and limit the amount of ballooning
of the cusps towards the cavity of the atrium.
d. The atrioventricular valves are kept competent by
active contraction of the papillary muscles, which
pull on the chordae tendineae during ventricular
systole. Each papillary muscle is connected to the
contiguous halves of two cusps (Fig. 18.13).
2 Blood vessels are present only in the fibrous ring and
in the basal one-third of the cusps. Nutrition to the
central two-thirds of the cusps is derived directly
from the blood in the cavity of the heart.
3 The tricuspid valve has three cusps are can admit the
tips of three fingers. The three cusps—the anterior,
posterior or inferior, and septal. These lie against the
three walls of the ventricle. Of the three papillary
muscles, the anterior is the largest, the inferior is
smaller and irregular, and the septal is represented
by a number of small muscular elevations.
Figs 18.17a and b: (a) Interior of heart, and (b) the cusps of atrioventricular valves
4 The mitral or bicuspid valve has two cusps—a large
anterior or aortic cusp, and a small posterior cusp. It
admits the tips of two fingers. The anterior cusp lies
between the mitral and aortic orifices. The mitral
cusps are smaller and thicker than those of the tricuspid
valve.
For surface marking of valves, see Fig. 21.6.
Semilunar Valves
1 The aortic and pulmonary valves are called semilunar
valves because their cusps are semilunar in shape. Both
valves are similar to each other (Figs 18.17a and b).
2 Each valve has three cusps which are attached directly
to the vessel wall, there being no fibrous ring. The
cusps form small pockets with their mouths directed
away from the ventricular cavity. The free margin of
each cusp contains a central fibrous nodule from each
side of which a thin smooth margin the lunule extends
up to the base of the cusp. These valves are closed
during ventricular diastole when each cusp bulges
towards the ventricular cavity (Fig. 18.17).
3 Opposite the cusps, the vessel walls are slightly
dilated to form the aortic and pulmonary sinuses.
The coronary arteries arise from the anterior and the
left posterior aortic sinuses (Fig. 18.18).
For surface marking, see Fig. 21.6.
CLINICAL ANATOMY
• The first heart sound is produced by closure of
the atrioventricular valves. The second heart
sound is produced by closure of the semilunar
valves (Figs 18.19a and b).
• Narrowing of the valve orifice due to fusion of
the cusps is known as ‘stenosis’, viz. mitral
stenosis, aortic stenosis, etc.
--- Page 319 ---
THORAX
Thorax
Section 2
• Dilatation of the valve orifice, or stiffening of the
cusps causes imperfect closure of the valve leading
to back flow of blood. This is known as incom-
petence or regurgitation, e.g. aortic incompetence
or aortic regurgitation.
Competency achievement: The student should be able to:
AN 22.6 Describe the fibrous skeleton of heart.3
FIBROUS SKELETON
The fibrous rings surrounding the atrioventricular and
arterial orifices, along with some adjoining masses of
fibrous tissue, constitute the fibrous skeleton of the
heart. It provides attachment to the cardiac muscle and
keeps the cardiac valves competent (Fig. 18.20).
The atrioventricular fibrous rings are in the form of
the figure of 8. The atria, the ventricles and the
membranous part of the interventricular septum are
attached to them. There is no muscular continuity
between the atria and ventricles across the rings except
for the atrioventricular bundle or bundle of His.
There is large mass of fibrous tissue between the
atrioventricular rings behind and the aortic ring in front.
It is known as the trigonum fibrosum dextrum. In some
mammals, like sheep, a small bone the os cordis is
present in this mass of fibrous tissue.
Another smaller mass of fibrous tissue is present
between the aortic and mitral rings. It is known as the
trigonum fibrosum sinistrum. The tendon of the infundi-
bulum (close to pulmonary valve) binds the posterior
surface of the infundibulum to the aortic ring.
MUSCULATURE OF THE HEART
Cardiac muscle fibres form long loops which are
attached to the fibrous skeleton. Upon contraction of the
muscular loops, the blood from the cardiac chambers is
wrung out like water from a wet cloth. The atrial fibres
are arranged in a superficial transverse layer and a deep
anteroposterior (vertical) layer.
The ventricular fibres are arranged in superficial and
deep layers.
The superficial fibres arise from skeleton of the heart
to undergo a spiral course. First these pass across the
inferior surface, wind round the lower border and then
Fig. 18.20: Heart seen from above after removing the atria. The
mitral, tricuspid, aortic and pulmonary orifices and their valves
are seen. The fibrous skeleton of the heart is also shown
(anatomical position)
Figs 18.19a and b: (a) First heart sound, and (b) second heart
sound
Fig. 18.18: Structure of the aortic valve
--- Page 320 ---
PERICARDIUM AND HEART
Thorax
Section 2
CONDUCTING SYSTEM
The conducting system is made up of myocardium that
is specialised for initiation and conduction of the cardiac
impulse. Its fibres are finer than other myocardial fibres,
and are completely cross-striated. The conducting
system has the following parts.
1 Sinuatrial node or SA node: It is known as the
‘pacemaker’ of the heart. It generates impulses at the
rate of about 70–100 beats/min and initiates the
heartbeat. It is horseshoe-shaped and is situated at
the atriocaval junction in the upper part of the sulcus
terminals. The impulse travels through the atrial wall
to reach the AV node (Fig. 18.14).
Fig. 18.21a: Superficial transverse fibres of atria and superficial
fibres of ventricles 1, 2
Fig. 18.21c: Deep fibres of ventricles in three layers
across the sternocostal surface to reach the apex of heart,
where these fibres form a vortex and continue with the
deep layer.
Superficial fibres are:
a. Fibres start from tendon of infundibulum (1) pass
across the diaphragmatic surface, curve around
inferior border to reach the sternocostal surface.
Then these fibres cross the anterior interventri-
cular groove to reach the apex, where these form
a vortex and end in anterior papillary muscle of
left ventricle (Fig. 18.21a).
b. Fibres arise from right AV ring take same course
as (2) but end in posterior papillary muscle
(Fig. 18.21a).
c. Fibres arise from left AV ring, lie along the
diaphragmatic surface, cross the posterior inter-
ventricular groove to reach the papillary muscles
of right ventricle (Fig. 18.21b).
d. Deep fibres are ‘S’ shaped. These arise from
papillary muscle of one ventricle, turn in inter-
ventricular groove, to end in papillary muscle of
other ventricle. Fibres of first layer circle RV, cross
through interventricular septum and end in
papillary muscle of LV. Layers two and three have
decreasing course in RV and increasing course in
LV (Fig. 18.21c).
Competency achievement: The student should be able to:
AN 22.7 Mention the parts, position and arterial supply of the
conducting system of heart.4
Fig. 18.21b: Vertical fibres of atria and superficial fibres of
ventricle 3
--- Page 321 ---
THORAX
Thorax
Section 2
2 Atrioventricular node or AV node: It is smaller than
the SA node and is situated in the lower and dorsal
part of the atrial septum just above the opening of
the coronary sinus. It is capable of generating
impulses at a rate of about 40 to 60 beats/minute.
3 Atrioventricular bundle or AV bundle or bundle of His: It
is the only muscular connection between the atrial and
ventricular musculatures. It begins as the atrio-
ventricular (AV) node crosses AV ring and descends
along the posteroinferior border of the membranous
part of the ventricular septum. At the upper border
of the muscular part of the septum, it divides into right
and left branches.
4 The right branch of the AV bundle passes down the
right side of the interventricular septum. A large part
enters the moderator band to reach the anterior wall
of the right ventricle where it divides into Purkinje
fibres.
5 The left branch of the AV bundle descends on the
left side of the interventricular septum and is
distributed to the left ventricle after dividing into
Purkinje fibres.
6. The Purkinje fibres form a subendocardial plexus.
They are large pale fibres striated only at their
margins. They usually possess double nuclei. These
generate impulses at the rate of 20–35 beats/minute.
Blood supply: Whole of conducting system except left
branch of AV bundle is supplied by right coronary
artery. In 40% cases, left coronary artery supplies SA
node.
CLINICAL ANATOMY
Defects of or damage to conducting system results
in cardiac arrhythmias, i.e. defects in the normal
rhythm of contraction. Except for a part of the left
branch of the AV bundle supplied by the left
coronary artery, the whole of the conducting system
is usually supplied by the right coronary artery.
Vascular lesions of the heart can cause a variety of
arrhythmias.
Competency achievement: The student should be able to:
AN 22.3 Describe and demonstrate origin, course and branches of
coronary arteries.5
ARTERIES SUPPLYING THE HEART
The heart is supplied by two coronary arteries, arising
from the ascending aorta. Both arteries run in the
coronary sulcus.
Features of Coronary Arteries
i. The blood flows through these arteries during
diastole of heart.
ii. Diameter is 1.5–5.2 mm.
iii. Left coronary is larger in calibre and supplies
more myocardium.
iv. These arteries are ‘functional end arteries’.
Though their branches anastomose with each
other but one cannot compensate for the other
artery in case of thrombosis.
v. The origin of posterior interventricular artery
determines the dominance of the artery.
vi. Sympathetic stimulation dilates the intra-
muscular arteries and constricts the epicardial
arteries.
RIGHT CORONARY ARTERY
Position
Right coronary artery is smaller than the left coronary
artery. It arises from the anterior aortic sinus
(Figs 18.22a and b) of ascending aorta.
Course
1 It first passes forwards and to the right to emerge on
the surface of the heart between the root of the
pulmonary trunk and the right auricle.
2 It then runs downwards in the right anterior
coronary sulcus to the junction of the right and
inferior borders of the heart.
3 It winds round the inferior border to reach the
diaphragmatic surface of the heart. Here it runs
backwards and to the left in the right posterior
coronary sulcus to reach the posterior inter-
ventricular groove.
4 It terminates by anastomosing with the circumflex
branch of left coronary artery at the crux.
Branches
• Atrial branches are anterior, posterior and lateral.
One of the anterior atrial branches is called SA nodal
artery. It arises from right coronary artery in 60%
cases.
• Right conus artery forms an arterial circle around
pulmonary trunk with a similar branch from the left
coronary artery. The circle is called, ‘annulus of
Vieussens’.
• Ventricular branches are as anterior and posterior
groups. The anterior group lies on the sternocostal
surface while posterior group traverses the
diaphragmatic surface of the heart.
• Right marginal artery arises as the right coronary
artery crosses the right border of heart. It runs along
its inferior border till the apex of heart.
--- Page 322 ---
PERICARDIUM AND HEART
Thorax
Section 2
DISSECTION
Carefully remove the fat from the coronary sulcus.
Identify the right coronary artery in the depth of the right
part of the atrioventricular sulcus (Figs 18.22a and b).
Trace the right coronary artery superiorly to its
origin from the right aortic sinus and inferiorly till it turns
onto the posterior surface of the heart to lie in its
atrioventricular sulcus. It gives off the posterior inter-
ventricular branch which is seen in posterior inter-
ventricular groove.
The right coronary artery ends by anastomosing with
the circumflex branch of left coronary artery or by
dipping itself deep in the myocardium there.
LEFT CORONARY ARTERY
Position
Left coronary artery is larger than the right coronary
artery. It arises from the left posterior aortic sinus of
ascending aorta.
Course
1 The artery first runs forwards and to the left and
emerges between the pulmonary trunk and the left
auricle. Here it gives the anterior interventricular
branch which runs downwards in the groove of the
same name. The further continuation of the left
coronary artery is called the circumflex artery
(Figs 18.22a and 18.23).
2 After giving off the anterior interventricular branch,
the artery runs to the left in the left anterior coronary
sulcus.
• Posterior interventricular branch arises close to the
crux of heart and lies in the posterior interventicular
groove. It gives septal branches to posterior one-third
of interventricular septum. It also supplies AV node.
Area of Distribution
1 Right atrium
2 Ventricles:
a. Greater part of the right ventricle, except the area
adjoining the anterior interventricular groove.
b. A small part of the left ventricle adjoining the
posterior interventricular groove.
3 Posterior one-third part of the interventricular septum.
4 Whole of the conducting system of the heart except
a part of the left branch of the AV bundle. The SA
node is supplied by the left coronary artery in about
40% of cases.
Figs 18.22a and b: Arterial supply of heart: (a) Sternocostal
surface, and (b) diaphragmatic surface
Fig. 18.23: Origin of the coronary arteries from the aortic sinuses
and their course in the coronary sulcus, as seen after removal
of the atria (anatomical position)
--- Page 323 ---
THORAX
Thorax
Section 2
CARDIAC DOMINANCE
In about 10% of hearts, the right coronary is rather small
and is not able to give the posterior interventricular
branch. In these cases, the circumflex artery, the
continuation of left coronary, provides the posterior
interventricular branch as well as to the AV node. Such
cases are called left dominant.
Mostly, the right coronary gives posterior inter-
ventricular artery. Such hearts are right dominant. Thus
the artery giving the posterior interventricular branch
is the dominant artery.
Collateral Circulation
Cardiac Anastomoses
The two coronary arteries anastomose with each other
in myocardium.
Extracardiac Anastomoses
The coronary arteries anastomose with the following.
1 Vasa vasorum of the aorta
2 Vasa vasorum of the pulmonary arteries
3 The internal thoracic arteries
4 The bronchial arteries
5 The pericardiacophrenic arteries
The last three anastomose through the pericardium.
These channels may open up in emergencies when both
coronary arteries are obstructed.
Retrograde flow of blood in the veins may irrigate the
myocardium.
These anastomoses are of little practical value. They
are not able to provide an alternative source of blood
in case of blockage of a branch of a coronary artery.
Blockage of arteries or coronary thrombosis usually
leads to death of myocardium. The condition is called
myocardial infarction.
3 It winds round the left border of the heart and
continues in the left posterior coronary sulcus. Near
the posterior interventricular groove, it terminates
by anastomosing with the right coronary artery.
Branches
• Anterior interventricular branch is a large branch. It
descends in the anterior interventricular groove. It
gives following branches.
i. Anterior ventricular branches for the ventricles.
The large branch is called ‘left diagonal artery’.
ii. Septal branches which supply anterior two-thirds
of the interventricular septum.
iii. Left conus artery forms an arterial ring around
the pulomonary trunk with a similar branch from
right coronary artery.
• Circumflex branch is the terminal part of left
coronary artery after it has given off the large anterior
interventricular branch. Circumflex branch runs in
the left anterior coronary sulcus, then curves around
the left border of heart to lie in the left posterior
coronary sulcus. It ends by anastomosing with the
terminal part of right coronary artery, a little to the
left of the crux. Its branches are:
i. Left marginal artery which lies along the left
border of heart till the apex of heart.
ii. Anterior and posterior ventricular branches
iii. Atrial branches which are in anterior, posterior
and lateral groups.
Area of Distribution
1 Left atrium
2 Ventricles:
a. Greater part of the left ventricle, except the area
adjoining the posterior interventricular groove.
b. A small part of the right ventricle adjoining the
anterior interventricular groove.
3 Anterior part of the interventricular septum (Fig. 18.24).
4 A part of the left branch of the AV bundle.
DISSECTION
Strip the visceral pericardium from the sternocostal
surface of the heart. Expose the anterior interventricular
branch of the left coronary artery and the great cardiac
vein by carefully removing the fat from the anterior
interventricular sulcus. Note the branches of the artery
to both ventricles and to the interventricular septum
which lies deep to it. Trace the artery inferiorly to the
diaphragmatic surface and superiorly to the left of the
pulmonary trunk (Fig. 18.22b).
Trace the circumflex branch of left coronary artery
on the left border of heart into the posterior part of
the sulcus, where it may end by anastomosing with the
right coronary artery or by dipping into the myocardium.
Fig. 18.24: Transverse section through the ventricles showing
the areas supplied by the two coronary arteries
--- Page 324 ---
PERICARDIUM AND HEART
Thorax
Section 2
VEINS OF THE HEART
These are the great cardiac vein, the middle cardiac
vein, the right marginal vein, the posterior vein of the
left ventricle, the oblique vein of the left atrium, the
anterior cardiac veins, and the venae cordis minimae
Fig. 18.26: Pain of angina pectoris felt in precordium and
along medial border of left arm
Competency achievement: The student should be able to:
AN 22.4 Describe anatomical basis of ischaemic heart disease.6
CLINICAL ANATOMY
• Thrombosis of coronary artery is a common cause
of sudden death in persons past middle age. This
is due to myocardial ischaemia infarction and
ventricular fibrillation (Fig. 18.25).
Fig. 18.28: Grafts put beyond the site of blockage
• Incomplete obstruction, usually due to spasm of
the coronary artery causes angina pectoris, which
is associated with agonising pain in the precordial
region and down the medial side of the left arm
and forearm (Fig. 18.26). Pain gets relieved by
putting appropriate tablets below the tongue.
• Coronary angiography determines the site(s) of
narrowing or occlusion of the coronary arteries
or their branches.
• Angioplasty helps in removal of small blockage.
It is done using small stent or small inflated
balloon (Fig. 18.27) through a catheter passed
upwards through femoral artery, aorta, into the
coronary artery.
• If there are large segments or multiple sites of
blockage, coronary bypass is done using either
great saphenous vein or internal thoracic artery
as graft(s) (Fig. 18.28).
Fig. 18.27: Stent passed in the blocked coronary artery
Fig. 18.25: Myocardial infarction due to blockage of anterior
interventricular branch of left coronary artery
--- Page 325 ---
THORAX
Thorax
Section 2
(Figs 18.29a and b). All veins except the last two drain
into the coronary sinus which opens into the right
atrium. The anterior cardiac veins and the venae cordis
minimae open directly into the right atrium.
Competency achievement: The student should be able to:
AN 22.5 Describe and demonstrate the formation, course,
tributaries and termination of coronary sinus.7
Coronary Sinus
The coronary sinus is the largest vein of the heart. It is
situated in the left posterior coronary sulcus. It is about
3 cm long. It ends by opening into the posterior wall of
the right atrium. It receives the following tributaries:
1 The great cardiac vein accompanies first the anterior
interventricular artery and then the circumflex artery
to enter the left end of the coronary sinus
(Fig. 18.29a). It receives the left marginal vein from
the left ventricle.
2 The middle cardiac vein accompanies the posterior
interventricular artery, and joins the middle part of
the coronary sinus.
3 The small cardiac vein accompanies the right coronary
artery in the right posterior coronary sulcus and joins
the right end of the coronary sinus. The right marginal
vein may drain into the small cardiac vein (Fig. 18.29b).
4 The posterior vein of the left ventricle runs on the
diaphragmatic surface of the left ventricle and ends
in the coronary sinus.
5 The oblique vein of the left atrium of Marshall is a small
vein running on the posterior surface of the left
atrium. It terminates in the left end of the coronary
sinus. It develops from the left common cardinal vein
or duct of Cuvier which may sometimes form a large
left superior vena cava.
6 The right marginal vein accompanies the marginal
branch of the right coronary artery. It may either drain
into the small cardiac vein, or may open directly into
the right atrium.
Anterior Cardiac Veins
The anterior cardiac veins are three or four small veins
which run parallel to one another on the anterior wall of
the right ventricle and usually open directly into the
right atrium through its anterior wall.
Venae Cordis Minimae
The venae cordis minimae or thebesian veins or smallest
cardiac veins are numerous small valveless veins present
in all four chambers of the heart which open directly into
the cavity. These are more numerous on the right side
of the heart than on the left. This may be one reason why
left-sided infarcts are more common.
LYMPHATICS OF HEART
Lymphatics of the heart accompany the coronary
arteries and form two trunks. The right trunk ends in
the brachiocephalic nodes, and the left trunk ends in the
tracheobronchial lymph nodes at the bifurcation of
the trachea.
NERVE SUPPLY OF HEART
Parasympathetic nerves reach the heart via the vagus.
These are cardioinhibitory; on stimulation, they slow
down the heart rate.
Sympathetic nerves are derived from the upper four
to five thoracic segments of the spinal cord. These are
cardioacceleratory, and on stimulation, they increase
the heart rate, and also dilate the coronary arteries.
Figs 18.29a and b: Veins of the heart: (a) Sternocostal surface, and (b) diaphragmatic surface
--- Page 326 ---
PERICARDIUM AND HEART
Thorax
Section 2
Both parasympathetic and sympathetic nerves form
the superficial and deep cardiac plexuses, the branches
of which run along the coronary arteries to reach the
myocardium.
The superficial cardiac plexus is situated below the arch
of the aorta in front of the right pulmonary artery. It is
formed by:
a. The superior cervical cardiac branch of the left
sympathetic chain.
b. The inferior cervical cardiac branch of the left
vagus nerve.
The plexus is connected to the deep cardiac plexus,
the right coronary artery, and to the left anterior
pulmonary plexus (Fig. 18.30).
The deep cardiac plexus is situated in front of the
bifurcation of the trachea, and behind the arch of the
aorta. It is formed by all the cardiac branches derived
from all the cervical and upper thoracic ganglia of the
sympathetic chain, and the cardiac branches of the vagus
and recurrent laryngeal nerves, except those which form
the superficial plexus. The right and left halves of the
plexus distribute branches to the corresponding
coronary and pulmonary plexuses. Separate branches
are given to the atria.
CLINICAL ANATOMY
• Cardiac pain is an ischaemic pain caused by
incomplete obstruction of a coronary artery.
• Axons of pain fibres conveyed by the sensory
sympathetic cardiac nerves reach thoracic one to
thoracic five segments of spinal cord mostly
through the dorsal root ganglia of the left side.
Since these dorsal root ganglia also receive
sensory impulses from the medial side of arm,
forearm and upper part of front of chest, the pain
gets referred to these areas as depicted in
Fig. 18.26.
• Viscera have low amount of sensory output
whereas skin is an area of high amount of sensory
output. So pain arising from area of low sensory
output area is projected as coming from high
sensory output area.
Competency achievement: The student should be able to:
AN 25.2 Describe development of respiratory system and heart.8
Development of respiratory system has been
described in Chapter 16 and development of heart has
been described in this chapter.
DEVELOPMENTAL COMPONENTS
1 Right atrium (Fig. 18.11)
a. Rough anterior part—atrial chamber proper.
b. Smooth posterior part:
– Absorption of right horn of sinus venosus
– Interatrial septum
Demarcating part—crista terminalis.
Fig. 18.30: Formation of superficial and deep cardiac plexuses
--- Page 327 ---
THORAX
Thorax
Section 2
2 Left atrium (Figs 18.16 and 18.29b)
a. Rough part—atrial chamber proper
b. Smooth part:
– Absorption of pulmonary veins.
– Interatrial septum.
3 Right ventricle
a. Rough part—proximal portion of bulbus cordis
(Fig. 18.12).
b. Smooth part—the conus cordis or middle portion
of bulbus cordis.
4 Left ventricle (Fig. 18.16)
a. Rough part—whole of primitive ventricular
chamber.
b. The conus cordis or the middle portion of bulbus
cordis forms the smooth part.
5 Interatrial septum
a. Septum primum—fossa ovalis.
b. Septum secundum—limbus fossa ovalis.
6 Interventricular septum
a. Thick muscular in lower part by the two ventricles.
b. Thin membranous in upper part by fusion of
inferior atrioventricular cushion and right and
left conus swelling. Membranous part not only
separates the two ventricles, but also separates
right atrium from left ventricle.
7 Truncus arteriosus or distal part of bulbus cordis
forms the ascending aorta and pulmonary trunk, as
separated by spiral septum.
Spiral septum is responsible for triple relation of
ascending aorta and pulmonary trunk. At the beginning,
pulmonary trunk is anterior to ascending aorta, then it
is to the left and finally the right pulmonary artery is
posterior to ascending aorta (Fig. 18.10).
Heart is fully functional at the end of second month
of intrauterine life.
MOLECULAR REGULATION OF CARDIAC DEVELOPMENT
The genes involved in cardiac development are
Nirenberg and Kim 2 Homeobox 5 (NKX-2). This is the
master gene regulating development of heart.
Heart and neural crest derivative 1 (HAND-1) and
HAND-2 are other genes involved in development of
the ventricles.
Singnaling molecules involved are bone morpho-
genic proteins (BMPs 2 and 4) secreted by the endoderm
and lateral plate mesoderm which induce the heart
forming region of splanchnic mesoderm.
Crescent and cerebrus produced by endoderm cells
inhibit WNT proteins 3a and 8 secreted by neural tube
which inhibit heart development. Thus cardiac
development proceeds uninhibited. Cardiac looping is
dependent on lefty 2. TBX 5 is important for septation.
Competency achievement: The student should be able to:
AN 25.3 Describe fetal circulation and changes occurring at birth.9
FOETAL CIRCULATION
The foetus (Greek offspring) is dependent for its entire
nutrition on the mother, and this is achieved through
the placenta attached to the uterus. As the lungs are
not functioning, the blood needs to bypass the
pulmonary circuit. The oxygenated blood reaches the
foetus through the single ‘umbilical vein’. This vein
containing oxygenated blood traverses the umbilical
cord to reach the liver. The oxygenated blood bypasses
the liver via ‘the ductus venosus’ to join inferior vena
cava. As inferior vena cava drains into the right atrium,
the oxygenated and nutrient-rich blood brought by it
enters the right atrium. Then it passes into the left
atrium through ‘foramen ovale’, thus bypassing the
pulmonary circuit (Figs 18.31 and 18.32).
From the left atrium, it enters the left ventricle and
traverses the systemic circuit via the ascending aorta,
arch of aorta and descending thoracic and descending
abdominal aortae. The last mentioned vessel divides
into common iliac arteries. Each common iliac artery
terminates by dividing into external and internal iliac
arteries. Arising from two internal iliac arteries are the
two umbilical arteries which in turn pass through the
umbilical cord to end in the placenta.
The deoxygenated blood from the viscera, lower
limbs, head and neck and upper limbs also enters the
right atrium via both the inferior and superior venae
cavae. This venous blood gains entry into the right
ventricle and leaves it via the pulmonary trunk and
left pulmonary artery. The left pulmonary artery is
joined to the left end of arch of aorta via the ‘ductus
arteriosus’. Thus the venous blood traversing through
the left pulmonary artery and ductus arteriosus enters
the left end of arch of aorta. So the descending thoracic
and abdominal aortae get mixed blood. At the internal
iliac end, it passes via the two umbilical arteries to
reach the placenta for oxygenation.
So for bypassing the lungs and for providing oxygen
and nutrition to the developing embryo and foetus, the
following structures had to be improvised.
a. One umbilical vein
b. Ductus venosus
c. Foramen ovale
d. Ductus arteriosus
e. Two umbilical arteries.
Flowchart 18.1 shows the details of foetal
circulation.
At the time of birth, with the start of breathing
process, these structures (a–e) retrogress and gradually
the adult form of circulation takes over (Flowchart 18.2).
--- Page 328 ---
PERICARDIUM AND HEART
Thorax
Section 2
Changes at birth:
Lungs start functioning.
a. Umbilical vein forms ligamentum teres.
b. Ductus venosus forms ligamentum venosum.
c. Foramen ovale closes.
d. Ductus arteriosus forms ligamentum arteriosum.
Fig. 18.31: Foetal circulation in situ (schematic)
--- Page 329 ---
THORAX
Thorax
Section 2
Fig. 18.32: Details of foetal circulation. Percentage of oxygen
in blood vessels is put in numbers
e. Umbilical arteries form medial umbilical ligaments.
Placenta is delivered and removed.
Competency achievement: The student should be able to:
AN 25.4 Describe embryological basis of:
1) Atrial septal defect, 2) Ventricular septal defect, 3) Fallot’s
tetralogy.10
1. Atrial septal defect: Normally septum primum fuses
with septum secondum to obliterate interatrial
foramen. Incomplete fusion of the two septa leads
to atrial septal defect.
Flowchart 18.1: Foetal circulation
2. Ventricular septal defect: Ventricular septal defect is
due to defect in the formation of membranous part
of interventricular septum. This septum is formed
by right and left bulbar ridges and proliferating
posterior endocardial cushion. Improper fusion of
these three leads to ventricular septal defect. The
membranous part of interventricular septum is of
neural crest origin.
3. Fallot’s tetralogy: The components of Fallot’s tetralogy
are:
a. Patent interventricular foramen
b. Overriding of the aorta
c. Pulmonary stenosis
d. Right ventricular hypertrophy
--- Page 330 ---
PERICARDIUM AND HEART
Thorax
Section 2
Mnemonics
Heart valves “Try Pulling My Aorta”
Tricuspid
Pulmonary
Mitral
Aorta
Atrioventricular valve
"LAB RAT"
Left atrium: Bicuspid
Right atrium: Tricuspid
Lung lobe numbers: Right vs left
Tricuspid heart valve and tri-lobed lung both on the
right side.
Bicuspid and bi-lobed lung both on the left side.
FACTS TO REMEMBER
• Heart is a pump for pushing blood to the lungs
and for rest of the organs of the body. Due to
sympathetic stimulation, it is felt thumping against
the chest wall.
Flowchart 18.2: Postnatal circulation
• All the components of left ventricle are thicker as
it has to push the blood from top of head to the
toes of foot.
• Left atrium forms most of the base of the heart.
• Coronary arteries are functional end arteries.
• Pain of heart due to myocardial infarction is
referred to left side of chest between 3rd and 6th
intercostal spaces. It also get extended to medial
side of left upper limb in the area of distribution
of C8 and T1 spinal segments.
CLINICOANATOMICAL PROBLEMS
Case 1
An adult man was stabbed on his upper left side of
chest. He was taken to the casualty department of
the hospital. The casualty physician noted that the
stab wound was in left third intercostal space close
to the sternum. Further the patient has engorged
veins on the neck and face.
• What is the site of injury?
• Why are the veins of the neck and face engorged?
• What procedure would be done as an emergency
measure before taking him to operation theatre?
Ans: The injury is in left third intercostal space
injuring the pericardium and right ventricle, causing
haemopericardium. Veins of the neck and face are
engorged as the venae cavae are not able to pour
blood in the right atrium. Pericardial tapping is done
to take out the blood from the pericardial cavity. It
is done as an emergency measure.
Case 2
A 40-year-old lady while playing tennis, suddenly
fell down, holding onto her chest and left arm due
to severe pain.
• Why is the pain in her chest?
• Why is the pain in her left arm?
Ans: Tennis is a very strenuous game. The lady
fainted as there was more need for the oxygen. Since
it could not be supplied, the myocardium got
ischaemic which caused visceral pain. The pain is
carried by afferents which travel mostly with left side
sympathetic nerves to the thoracic one and thoracic
2–5 segments of the spinal cord. Since somatic nerves
(T1–T5) also travel to the same segments, the pain is
referred to the skin area. T1 supplies the medial side
of arm and T2–T5 supply the intercostal spaces.
Case 3
A 10-year-old boy had mild cough and fever. The
physician could feel the increased rate of his pulse,
but could not hear the heartbeat on the left side of
his chest. After some thought, the physician was able
to feel the heartbeat as well.
--- Page 331 ---
THORAX
Thorax
Section 2
3. Write short notes on:
a. Sinuses of pericardium
b. Interventricular septum
c. Valves of the heart
d. Comparison of right and left coronary arteries
e. Coronary sinus
1. Describe the gross features of heart like apex, base,
borders, surfaces and grooves.
2. Describe the right ventricle under following heads:
External features, openings, internal features,
conducting tissue.
1. The structures covering the heart are:
a. Fibrous pericardium
b. Parietal layer of serous pericardium
c. Pericardial cavity
d. All of the above
2. Boundaries of oblique sinus are all, except:
a. Superior and inferior venae cavae on right side
b. Anteriorly by left atrium
c. Posteriorly by right atrium
d. Left side by left pulmonary veins
3. Boundaries of base of heart are formed by all, except:
a. Four pulmonary veins
b. Oesophagus and descending aorta
c. Pericardium
d. Ascending aorta
4. Apex of the heart is felt at:
a. 8 cm lateral to midclavicular line in left 5th
intercostal space
b. 9 cm lateral to midclavicular line in left 5th
intercostal space
c. 9 cm lateral to midclavicular line in left 6th
intercostal space
d. 9 cm lateral to midclavicular line in right 5th
intercostal space
5. Entry channels of heart are all, except:
a. Superior vena cava
b. Inferior vena cava
c. 4 pulmonary veins
d. Pulmonary trunk
• Where is the normal apex beat heard?
• Name the congenital anomaly of the heart which
could cause inability of heart beat to be felt on the
left side.
Ans: Apex beat is normally heard in the left fifth
intercostal space, 9 cm from midsternal line, within
the left lateral line. The congenital anomaly in this case
is dextrocardia, when the heart is placed on the right
side of the heart. The apex beat is heard in right fifth
intercostal space to the right of the inferior end of the
sternum. In a few cases, not only the heart but the
viscera of abdomen and thorax are a mirror image of
normal. The condition is called ‘situs inversus’.
FURTHER READING
• Kawashima T. Anatomy of the cardiac nervous system with
clinical and comparative morphological implications. Anat
Sci Int 2011;86:30–49.
An exploration of the future implications of autonomic cardiac
nervous system (ACNS) preservation in cardiovascular surgery.
Morphological studies are described from macroscopic, clinical and
evolutionary anatomical viewpoints, together with their
applications in improving surgical technique and for future
evaluation in regenerative medicine.
• Krishnaiah, Mrudula. Morphometedic study of mitral
valve—an echocardiographic study. Int J Pharma and
Biological Sciences 2011;2:181–87.
• Mizeres NJ. The cardiac plexus in man. Am J Anat 1963;
12:141–51.
• Naveena S, Mrudula C. Patent foramen ovale: A cadaveric
observational study. Int J Health Sciences and Research
2015;5:387–89.
• Shashi Raheja, Lalit Mehra, Inch Agarwal, Kalwinder Kaur
Yashoda Rani, Anita Tuli. Morphological and surgical
anatomy of coronary sinus, its tributaries and relation to the
initial valve annulus. Annals of Anatomy 2014;196:85.
• Sinha P, Saxena S, Jethani SL, Khare S, Jain S, Mehrotra N.
Major primary congenital coronary artory anomalies: An
angiographic study. Anatomical Society of India 2012;61(2):
172–76.
• Sinha P, Saxena S, Khare S, Jain S, Ghai R, Tripathi A.
Angiographic study of origin of sinoatrial nodal artery in
northern Indian population. J Anatomical Society of India
2016;24 (2):7–10.
• Sylva M, van den Hoff MJ, Moorman AF. Development of
the human heart. Am J Med Genet A 2013;164A:1347–71.
This paper presents the signaling factors in heart development.
• Van Vonderen JJ, Roset AAW, Siew ML, et al. Measuring
physiological changes during the transition to life after birth.
Neonatology 2014;105:230–42.
1–10 From Medical Council of India, Competency based Undergraduate Curriculum for the Indian Medical Graduate, 2018;1:44–80.
--- Page 332 ---
PERICARDIUM AND HEART
Thorax
Section 2
• Name the ligaments connecting the fibrous
pericardium to the sternum.
• What are the boundaries of transverse sinus of the
pericardium?
• Name the boundaries of oblique sinus of the
pericardium.
• Name the veins opening in right atrium and in left
atrium.
• What is moderator band of right ventricle?
• Why is left ventricle the thickest chamber of the
heart?
• What is ‘cor pulmonale’?
• Name the cusps of the aortic and pulmonary valve.
• Trace the course of right coronary artery.
• Trace the course of left coronary artery.
• What is cardiac dominance?
• Which nerves form the superficial cardiac plexus?
• Where is apex beat normally felt?
• Where is pain of myocardial infarction (MI) referred?
• Define angina pectoris.
• What is mitral stenosis and mitral regurgitation?
• Why is mitral stenosis common after throat infection?
Which bacteria are responsible for such an incident?
• How is interatrial septum formed?
6. Trabeculae carneae of right ventricle are in all
following forms, except:
a. Ridges
b. Bridges
c. Papillary muscles
d. Chordae tendineae
7. Right coronary artery arises from which sinus?
a. Anterior aortic sinus
b. Right posterior aortic sinus
c. Left posterior aortic sinus
d. From anterior and posterior aortic sinuses
8. Blood to the interventricular septum is supplied by:
a. Only right coronary artery
b. Only left coronary artery
c. Anterior half by right coronary artery and
posterior half by left coronary artery
d. Anterior two-thirds by left coronary artery and
posterior one-third by right coronary artery
9. Coronary arteries anastomose with all the following
arteries except:
a. Vasa vasorum of the aorta
b. Vasa vasorum of pulmonary arteries
c. Bronchial arteries
d. Anterior intercostal arteries
10. Rough part of left ventricle develops from:
a. Whole of primitive ventricular chamber
b. Proximal part of bulbus cordis
c. Middle part of bulbus cordis
d. Distal part of bulbus cordis
1. d
2. c
3. d
4. b
5. d
6. d
7. a
8. d
9. d
10. a
--- Page 333 ---
THORAX
Thorax
Section 2
Superior Vena Cava, Aorta
and Pulmonary Trunk
Blood is meant to circulate, otherwise it forms clots blocking the vessels.
—Anonymous
INTRODUCTION
Superior vena cava brings deoxygenated blood from the
head and neck, upper limbs and thorax to the heart. Aorta
and pulmonary trunk are the only two exit channels from
the heart, developing from a single truncus arteriosus. The
two are intimately related to each other.
DISSECTION
Trace superior vena cava from level of first right costal
cartilage where it is formed by union of left and right
brachiocephalic veins till the third costal cartilage where
it opens into right atrium (Fig. 19.1).
Trace the ascending aorta from the vestibule of left
ventricle upwards between superior vena cava and
pulmonary trunk (Fig. 19.2).
Arch of aorta is seen above the bifurcation of
pulmonary trunk.
Cut ligamentum arteriosum as it connects the left
pulmonary artery to the arch of aorta.
Trace the left recurrent laryngeal nerve to the medial
aspect of arch of aorta.
Lift the side of oesophagus forwards to expose the
anterior surface of the descending aorta.
Lift the diaphragm forwards and expose the aorta in
the inferior part of the posterior mediastinum.
Competency achievement: The student should be able to:
AN 23.3 Describe and demonstrate origin, course, relations,
tributaries and termination of superior vena cava (described below),
azygos, hemiazygos and accessory hemiazygos veins (described in
Chapter 14).1
SUPERIOR VENA CAVA
Superior vena cava is a large venous channel which
collects blood from the upper half of the body and drains
it into the right atrium. It is formed by the union of the
right and left brachiocephalic or innominate veins behind
the lower border of the first right costal cartilage close to
the sternum. Each brachiocephalic vein is formed behind
the corresponding sternoclavicular joint by the union of
the internal jugular and subclavian veins (Fig. 19.1).
Course
The superior vena cava is about 7 cm long. It begins
behind the lower border of the sternal end of the first
right costal cartilage, pierces the pericardium opposite
the second right costal cartilage, and terminates by
opening into the upper part of the right atrium behind
the third right costal cartilage (Fig. 19.2). It has no valves.
Relations
1 Anterior
a. Chest wall
b. Internal thoracic vessels
c. Anterior margin of the right lung and pleura
d. The vessel is covered by pericardium in its lower
half (Fig. 19.2).
2 Posterior
a. Trachea and right vagus (posteromedial to the
upper part of the vena cava) (see Fig. 16.2)
b. Root of right lung posterior to the lower part
3 Medial
a. Ascending aorta
b. Brachiocephalic artery
4 Lateral
a. Right phrenic nerve with accompanying vessels
b. Right pleura and lung (Fig. 19.5)
Tributaries
1 The azygos vein arches over the root of the right lung
and opens into the superior vena cava at the level of
the second costal cartilage, just before the latter enters
the pericardium.
2 Several small mediastinal and pericardial veins drain
into the vena cava.
--- Page 334 ---
SUPERIOR VENA CAVA, AORTA AND PULMONARY TRUNK
Thorax
Section 2
CLINICAL ANATOMY
• When the superior vena cava is obstructed above
the opening of the azygos vein, the venous blood
of the upper half of the body is returned through
the azygos vein; and the superficial veins are
dilated on the chest up to the costal margin
(Fig. 19.3). Blood from upper limb is returned
through the communicating veins joining the
veins around the scapula with the intercostal
veins. The latter veins of both sides drain into vena
azygos (see Flowchart 14.1).
• When the superior vena cava is obstructed below
the opening of the azygos veins, the blood is
returned through the inferior vena cava via the
femoral vein; and the superior veins are dilated on
both the chest and abdomen up to the saphenous
opening in the thigh. The superficial vein
connecting the lateral thoracic vein with the
superficial epigastric vein is known as the
thoracoepigastric vein (Fig. 19.4) (see Flowchart 14.2).
• In cases of mediastinal syndrome, the signs of
superior vena caval obstruction are the first to
appear.
AORTA
The aorta is the great arterial trunk which receives
oxygenated blood from the left ventricle and distributes
it to all parts of the body. It is studied in thorax in the
following three parts:
Fig. 19.1: Formation of superior vena cava
Fig. 19.2: The superior vena cava and its relations
--- Page 335 ---
THORAX
Thorax
Section 2
Fig. 19.4: Obstruction to superior vena cava below the
opening of vena azygos
1 Ascending aorta
2 Arch of the aorta
3 Descending thoracic aorta.
ASCENDING AORTA
Origin and Course
The ascending aorta arises from the upper end of the
left ventricle. It is about 5 cm long and is enclosed in
the pericardium (Fig. 19.2). It begins behind the left half
of the sternum at the level of the lower border of the
third costal cartilage. It runs upwards, forwards and to
the right and becomes continuous with the arch of the
aorta at the sternal end of the upper border of the second
right costal cartilage.
At the root of the aorta, there are three dilatations of
the vessel wall, called the aortic sinuses. The sinuses are
anterior, left posterior and right posterior.
Relations
Anterior
1 Sternum
2 Right lung and pleura
3 Infundibulum of the right ventricle
4 Root of the pulmonary trunk (Fig. 19.5)
5 Right auricle
Posterior
1 Transverse sinus of pericardium
2 Left atrium
3 Right pulmonary artery
4 Right bronchus (Fig. 19.5)
To the Right
1 Superior vena cava
2 Right atrium
To the Left
1 Pulmonary trunk above
2 Left atrium below
Branches
1 The right coronary artery arises from anterior aortic
sinus (see Fig. 18.18).
2 Left coronary artery arises from the left posterior
aortic sinus.
Competency achievement: The student should be able to:
AN 25.5 Describe developmental basis of congenital anomalies,
transposition of great vessels, dextrocardia, patent ductus arteriosus
and coarctation of aorta.2
AN 23.4 Mention the extent, branches and relations of arch of aorta
and descending thoracic aorta.3
ARCH OF AORTA
Arch of the aorta is the continuation of the ascending
aorta. It is situated in the superior mediastinum behind
the lower half of the manubrium sterni.
Fig. 19.3: Obstruction to superior vena cava above the
opening of vena azygos
--- Page 336 ---
SUPERIOR VENA CAVA, AORTA AND PULMONARY TRUNK
Thorax
Section 2
Course
1 It begins behind the upper border of the second right
sternochondral joint (see Figs 17.2 and 17.4).
2 It runs upwards, backwards and to the left across
the left side of the bifurcation of trachea. Then it
passes downwards behind the left bronchus and on
the left side of the body of the fourth thoracic
vertebra. It thus arches over the root of the left lung.
3 It ends at the lower border of the body of the fourth
thoracic vertebra by becoming continuous with the
descending aorta.
Thus the beginning and the end of arch of aorta are
at the same level, although it begins anteriorly and ends
posteriorly.
Relations
Anteriorly and to the Left
1 Four nerves from before backwards:
a. Left phrenic
b. Lower cervical cardiac branch of the left vagus
c. Superior cervical cardiac branch of left sympathetic
chain.
d. Left vagus (Fig. 19.6).
2 Left superior intercostal vein, deep to the phrenic
nerve and superficial to the vagus nerve
3 Left pleura and lung
4 Remains of thymus
Figs 19.5a and b: (a) CT scan, and (b) Transverse section of the thorax passing through the fifth thoracic vertebra
--- Page 337 ---
THORAX
Thorax
Section 2
Posteriorly and to the Right
1 Trachea, with the deep cardiac plexus and the
tracheobronchial lymph nodes
2 Oesophagus
3 Left recurrent laryngeal nerve
4 Thoracic duct
5 Vertebral column
Superior
1 Three branches of the arch of the aorta:
a. Brachiocephalic
b. Left common carotid
c. Left subclavian arteries (Fig. 19.7)
2 All three arteries are crossed close to their origin by
the left brachiocephalic vein.
Inferior
1 Bifurcation of the pulmonary trunk (Fig. 19.2).
2 Left bronchus
3 Ligamentum arteriosum with superficial cardiac
plexus on it.
4 Left recurrent laryngeal nerve.
Branches
1 Brachiocephalic artery which divides into the right
common carotid and right subclavian arteries (Fig. 19.2).
2 Left common carotid artery
3 Left subclavian artery
DESCENDING THORACIC AORTA
Descending thoracic aorta is the continuation of the arch
of the aorta. It lies in the posterior mediastinum
(see Fig. 17.4). It continues as abdominal aorta which ends
by dividing into right and left common iliac arteries.
Course
1 It begins on the left side of the lower border of the
body of the fourth thoracic vertebra.
Figs 19.6: (a) CT scan, and (b) transverse section of the thorax passing through the fourth thoracic vertebra
--- Page 338 ---
SUPERIOR VENA CAVA, AORTA AND PULMONARY TRUNK
Thorax
Section 2
2 It descends with an inclination to the right and
terminates at the lower border of the twelfth thoracic
vertebra.
Relations
Anterior
1 Root of left lung
2 Pericardium and heart
3 Oesophagus in the lower part
4 Diaphragm
Posterior
1 Vertebral column
2 Hemiazygos veins
Figs 19.7a and b: (a) CT scan and (b) transverse section of thorax passing through the third thoracic vertebra
To the Right Side
1 Oesophagus in the upper part
2 Azygos vein
3 Thoracic duct (Fig. 19.5)
4 Right lung and pleura
To the Left Side
Left lung and pleura
Branches
1 Nine posterior intercostal arteries on each side for
the third to eleventh intercostal spaces (Fig. 19.8).
2 The subcostal artery on each side (see Fig. 14.8).
3 Two left bronchial arteries. The right bronchial artery
arises from the third right posterior intercostal artery.
--- Page 339 ---
THORAX
Thorax
Section 2
4 Oesophageal branches, supplying the middle one-
third of the oesophagus.
5 Pericardial branches, to the posterior surface of the
pericardium.
6 Mediastinal branches, to lymph nodes and areolar
tissue of the posterior mediastinum.
7 Superior phrenic arteries to the posterior part of the
superior surface of the diaphragm. Branches of these
arteries anastomose with those of the musculo-
phrenic and pericardiacophrenic arteries.
Competency achievement: The student should be able to:
AN 24.4 Identify phrenic nerve and describe its formation and
distribution.4
PHRENIC NERVE
Phrenic nerve arising from (C3–C5) cervical nerves is a
mixed nerve carrying motor fibres to the diaphragm
and sensory fibres from mediastinal pleura,
pericardium and part of peritoneum. Phrenic nerves
of two sides are compared as follows:
Right phrenic nerve: Right phrenic nerve is shorter,
vertical and deeply placed (see Fig 16.2). It crosses 2nd
part of right subclavian artery. It runs along right side
of venous system (Fig. 19.6) and passes through vena
caval opening of the diaphragm (see Fig. 12.16).
Left phrenic nerve: Left phrenic nerve is longer, oblique
and not deeply placed (see Fig. 16.3). It crosses 1st part
of left subclavian artery. It runs along left side of arterial
system and pierces the left cupola of the diaphragm.
CLINICAL ANATOMY
• Aortic knuckle: In posteroanterior view of
radiographs of the chest, the arch of the aorta is
seen as a projection beyond the left margin of the
mediastinal shadow. The projection is called the
aortic knuckle. It becomes prominent in old age
(see Fig. 21.12).
• Coarctation of the aorta is a localised narrowing of
the aorta opposite to or just beyond the attachment
of the ductus arteriosus. An extensive collateral
circulation develops between the branches of the
subclavian arteries and those of the descending
aorta. These include the anastomoses between the
anterior and posterior intercostal arteries. These
arteries enlarge greatly and produce a charac-
teristic notching on the ribs (Figs 19.9a and b).
• Ductus arteriosus, ligamentum arteriosum and patent
ductus arteriosus: During foetal life, the ductus
arteriosus (Fig. 19.10) is a short wide channel
connecting the beginning of the left pulmonary
artery with the arch of the aorta immediately distal
to the origin of the left subclavian artery. It
conducts most of the blood from the right ventricle
Fig. 19.8: Transverse section of posterior mediastinum at the
level of 8th vertebra
Figs 19.9a and b: (a) Coarctation of aorta, and (b) notches on the ribs
--- Page 340 ---
SUPERIOR VENA CAVA, AORTA AND PULMONARY TRUNK
Thorax
Section 2
into the aorta, thus short circuiting the lungs. After
birth, it is closed functionally within about a week
and anatomically within about eight weeks. The
remnants of the ductus form a fibrous band called
the ligamentum arteriosum. The left recurrent
laryngeal nerve hooks around the ligamentum
arteriosum.
The ductus may remain patent after birth. The
condition is called patent ductus arteriosus and may
cause serious problems. The condition can be
surgically treated.
• Aortic arch aneurysm is a localised dilatation of the
aorta which may press upon the left recurrent
laryngeal nerve leading to paralysis of left vocal
cord and hoarseness. It may also press upon the
surrounding structures and cause the mediastinal
syndrome (Fig. 19.11), i.e. dyspnoea, dysphagia,
dysphonia, etc.
PULMONARY TRUNK
The wide pulmonary trunk starts from the summit of
infundibulum of right ventricle. Both the ascending
aorta and pulmonary trunk are enclosed in a common
sleeve of serous pericardium, in front of transverse
sinus of pericardium. Pulmonary trunk carrying
deoxygenated blood, overlies the beginning of
ascending aorta. It courses to the left and divides
into right and left pulmonary arteries under the
concavity of aortic arch at the level of sternal angle
(Figs 19.2 and 19.5).
The right pulmonary artery courses to the right
behind ascending aorta, and superior vena cava and
anterior to oesophagus to become part of the root of the
lung. It gives off its first branch to the upper lobe before
entering the hilum. Within the lung, the artery descends
posterolateral to the main bronchus and divides like the
bronchi into lobar and segmental arteries.
The left pulmonary artery passes to the left anterior
to descending thoracic aorta to become part of the root
of the left lung. At its beginning, it is connected to the
inferior aspect of arch of aorta by ligamentum arteriosus,
a remnant of ductus arteriosus. Rest of the course is same
as of the right branch.
Competency achievement: The student should be able to:
AN 25.6 Mention development of aortic arch arteries, SVC, IVC and
coronary sinus.5
Fig. 19.11: Aortic aneurysm
Fig. 19.10: Patent ductus arteriosus
--- Page 341 ---
THORAX
Thorax
Section 2
Fig. 19.12: Fetal aortic arches showing development of arch arteries
Lower half of superior vena cava (intrapericardial)
develops from right common cardinal vein.
Coronary Sinus
Coronary sinus is a remnant of left horn of sinus
venosus. Great, middle and anterior cardiac veins drain
into this sinus.
Mnemonics
Thoracic cage: Relations to the important venous
structures
Behind sternoclavicular joints: The brachiocephalic
veins begin.
Behind the 1st costal cartilage on the right: The superior
vena cava begins.
Behind the 2nd costal cartilage on the right: The azygos
vein ends.
Behind the 3rd costal cartilage on the right: The superior
vena cava ends.
 Arch of Aorta
“Know your ABC’S”
Aortic arch gives rise to:
Brachiocephalic trunk
Left Common Carotid
Left Subclavian
Lung Lobe numbers: Right versus left
Tricuspid heart valve and tri-lobed lung both on the
right side.
Bicuspid heart valve and bi-lobed lung both on the
left side.
DEVELOPMENT OF ARTERIES (Fig. 19.12)
Brachoicephalic artery: Right aortic sac
Right subclavian artery: Proximal part from the right 4th
aortic arch artery and remaining part from right 7th
cervical intersegmental artery.
Left subclavian artery: Only left 7th cervical inter-
segmental artery.
Common carotid: Third aortic arch, distal to the external
carotid bud and original dorsal aorta cranial to the
attachment of third aortic arch.
External carotid artery: Develop as sprout from the third
aortic arch.
Pulmonary trunk: Part of truncus arteriosus.
Arch of aorta: Left aortic sac. Left 4th aortic arch. Left
dorsal aorta.
Relation to recurrent laryngeal nerve. Recurrent
laryngeal is given off from vagi in relation to distal part
of 6th arch artery. Since this distal part forms
ligamentum arteriosum on left side only, the recurrent
laryngeal nerve hooks around this ligamentum in
thorax to reach tracheo-oesophageal groove.
On the right side, there is no ligamentum arteriosum.
The recurrent laryngeal nerve slips upwards in the neck
and hooks around the right subclavian artery to reach
the tracheo-oesophageal groove.
DEVELOPMENT OF SUPERIOR VENA CAVA
Upper half of superior vena cava (extrapericardial)
develops from caudal part of right anterior cardinal
vein.
--- Page 342 ---
SUPERIOR VENA CAVA, AORTA AND PULMONARY TRUNK
Thorax
Section 2
FACTS TO REMEMBER
• Superior vena cava is the second largest vein of
the body.
• Vena azygos brings the venous blood from the
posterior parts of thoracic and abdominal wall.
• Aorta is the largest elastic artery of the body. It
takes oxygenated blood to all parts of the body
except the lungs.
• There is a gradual transition from its elastic nature
to muscular nature of its branches.
• Pulmonary trunk arises from the right ventricle.
It soon divides into right and left pulmonary
arteries which carry deoxygenated blood from
right ventricle to the lungs for oxygenation.
• Pulmonary trunk and ascending aorta develop
from a common source, the truncus arteriosus.
• There is triple relationship between these two
vessels:
– Close to heart, pulmonary trunk lies anterior to
ascending aorta.
– At upper border of heart, pulmonary trunk lies
to the left of ascending aorta (Fig. 19.2).
– A little above this, the right pulmonary artery
lies posterior to the ascending aorta.
CLINICOANATOMICAL PROBLEM
A teenage girl was complaining of breathlessness.
The physician heard a ‘machine-like murmur’ during
auscultation on the second left intercostal space, close
to the margin of sternum. There was continuous thrill
on the same site. On getting radiographs of chest and
angiocardiography, a diagnosis of patent ductus
arteriosus was made.
• What is the ‘machine-like’ murmur?
• How can the shunting of blood be prevented?
• Describe briefly the function of ductus arteriosus
during prenatal life. When does it close?
Ans: The ductus arteriosus is a patent channel during
fetal life for conducting the blood from left
pulmonary artery to arch of aorta beyond the origin
of left subclavian artery. The ductus carries blood
from right ventricle to descending thoracic aorta.
This is necessary as lungs are not functioning. After
birth, with the functioning of lungs, ductus arteriosus
obliterates and becomes ligamentum arteriosus. If
this does not take place (as it occurs in one out of
3000 births), there is back flow of blood from aorta
into pulmonary artery giving rise to ‘machine-like’
murmur. The treatment is surgical.
1–5 From Medical Council of India, Competency based Undergraduate Curriculum for the Indian Medical Graduate, 2018;1:44–80.
--- Page 343 ---
THORAX
Thorax
Section 2
1. Name the parts of aorta. Describe arch of aorta
under the following heading:
a. Beginning
b. Course
c. Relations
d. Branches
2. Describe the foetal circulation
3. Write short notes on:
a. Branches of descending thoracic aorta
b. Patent ductus arteriosus
c. Obstruction of superior vena cava
1. Branches of arch of aorta are all, except:
a. Brachiocephalic trunk
b. Left common carotid
c. Left subclavian
d. Vertebral
2. How many pairs of posterior intercostal arteries
arise from descending thoracic aorta?
a. Nine
b. Eleven
c. Ten
d. Twelve
3. Aortic aneurysm may cause following symptoms:
a. Dyspnoea
b. Dysphagia
c. Dysphonia
d. All of the above
4. Posterior relations of ascending aorta are all, except:
a. Transverse sinus of pericardium
b. Right atrium
c. Right pulmonary artery
d. Right bronchus
1. d
2. a
3. d
4. b
• How is superior vena cava formed?
• What are the parts of aorta?
• Name the branches of ascending aorta.
• Name the branches of arch of aorta.
• Name the branches of descending thoracic aorta.
• Name the collateral circulation which develops
during coarctation of aorta.
• What is the function of ductus arteriosus?
• What is the triple relation between pulmonary trunk
and ascending aorta?
--- Page 344 ---
Trachea, Oesophagus and
Thoracic Duct
INTRODUCTION
Trachea or windpipe is the patent tube for passage of
air to and from the lungs. In contrast, oesophagus lying
behind the trachea opens only while drinking or eating.
Thoracic duct brings the lymph from major parts of the
body to the root of the neck.
Competency achievement: The student should be able to:
AN 24.6 Describe the extent, length, relations, blood supply,
lymphatic drainage and nerve supply of trachea.1
TRACHEA
The trachea (Latin air vessel) is a wide tube lying more
or less in the midline, in the lower part of the neck and
in the superior mediastinum. Its upper end is con-
tinuous with the lower end of the larynx. The trachea
in the neck is covered by the isthmus of the thyroid
gland and acts as a shield for trachea. At its lower end,
the trachea ends by dividing into the right and left
principal bronchi (Fig. 20.1).
The trachea is 10 to 15 cm in length. Its external
diameter measures about 2 cm in males and about
1.5 cm in females. The lumen is smaller in the living
than in the cadaver. It is about 3 mm at one year of age.
During childhood, it corresponds to the age in years,
with a maximum of about 12 mm in adults, i.e. it
increases 1 mm per year up to 12 years.
The upper end of the trachea lies at the lower border
of the cricoid cartilage, opposite the sixth cervical
vertebra. In the cadaver, its bifurcated lower end lies
at the lower border of the fourth thoracic vertebra,
corresponding in front to the sternal angle. However,
in living subjects, in the erect posture, the bifurcation
lies at the lower border of the sixth thoracic vertebra
and descends still further during inspiration.
Over most of its length, the trachea lies in the median
plane, but near the lower end, it deviates slightly to the
right. As it runs downwards, the trachea passes slightly
backwards following the curvature of the spine.
Relations of the Thoracic Part
Anteriorly
1 Manubrium sterni
2 Sternothyroid muscles
3 Remains of the thymus
4 Left brachiocephalic and inferior thyroid veins
The best thing about animals is that they don’t talk much 
—T. Wilder
Fig. 20.1: Trachea and its relations
--- Page 345 ---
THORAX
Thorax
Section 2
5 Aortic arch, brachiocephalic and left common carotid
arteries
6 Deep cardiac plexus (see Fig. 19.6)
7 Some lymph nodes
Posteriorly
1 Oesophagus
2 Vertebral column
On the Right Side
1 Right lung and pleura
2 Right vagus
3 Azygos vein (Fig. 20.2)
On the Left Side
1 Arch of aorta, left common carotid and left sub-
clavian arteries
2 Left recurrent laryngeal nerve (Fig. 20.3)
Structure
The trachea has a fibroelastic wall supported by a
cartilaginous skeleton formed by C-shaped rings. The
rings are about 16 to 20 in number and make the tube
convex anterolaterally. Posteriorly, there is a gap which
is closed by a fibroelastic membrane and contains
transversely arranged smooth muscle known as the
trachealis. The lumen is lined by ciliated columnar
epithelium and contains many mucous and serous
glands.
Arterial Supply: Inferior thyroid arteries.
Venous drainage: Into the left brachiocephalic vein.
Lymphatic drainage: To the pretracheal and paratracheal
nodes.
Nerve Supply
1 Parasympathetic: Nerves through vagi and recurrent
laryngeal nerves. It is:
a. Sensory and secretomotor to the mucous membrane.
b. Motor to the trachealis muscle.
2 Sympathetic: Fibres from the middle cervical
ganglion reach it along the inferior thyroid arteries
and are vasomotor.
Development
Development of trachea is described in respiratory
system (see Chapter 16).
Competency achievement: The student should be able to:
AN 25.1 Identify, draw and label a slide of trachea and lung.2
HISTOLOGY OF TRACHEA
Trachea is a thin-walled flexible tube. The trachea is lined
by pseudostratified ciliated columnar epithelium with
interspersed goblet cells resting on a basement
membrane. The lamina propria consists of elastic fibres,
lymphocytes both segregated and aggregated and short
ducts of the glands (Fig. 20.4). The submucosa which
contains both mucous and serous acini that keep the
epithelium moist. The most characteristic feature of
Fig. 20.2: Mediastinum as seen from the right side
Fig. 20.3: Mediastinum as seen from the left side
--- Page 346 ---
TRACHEA, OESOPHAGUS AND THORACIC DUCT
Thorax
Section 2
trachea is its supporting framework of 16–20 C-shaped
hyaline cartilages that encircle it on its ventral and lateral
aspects. The cartilage is covered by perichondrium on
all sides which separates it from the neighbouring
structures. The outermost layer is the adventitia which
contains blood vessels and nerves.
CLINICAL ANATOMY
• In radiographs, the trachea is seen as a vertical
translucent shadow due to the contained air in
front of the cervicothoracic spine (see Fig. 21.12).
• Clinically, the trachea is palpated in the supra-
sternal notch. Normally, it is median in position.
Shift of the trachea to any side indicates a
mediastinal shift.
• During swallowing when the larynx is elevated,
the trachea elongates by stretching because the
tracheal bifurcation is not permitted to move by
the aortic arch. Any downward pull due to sudden
and forced inspiration, or aortic aneurysm will
produce the physical sign known as ‘tracheal tug’.
• Tracheostomy: It is a surgical procedure which allows
air to enter directly into trachea. It is done in cases
of blockage of air pathway in nose or larynx.
• As the tracheal rings are incomplete posteriorly,
the oesophagus can dilate during swallowing. This
also allows the diameter of the trachea to be
controlled by the trachealis muscle. This muscle
narrows the caliber of the tube, compressing the
contained air, if the vocal cords are closed. This
increases the explosive force of the blast of com-
pressed air, as occurs in coughing and sneezing.
• Mucus secretions help in trapping inhaled foreign
particles, and the soiled mucus is then expelled by
coughing. The cilia of the mucous membrane beat
upwards, pushing the mucus towards the pharynx.
• The trachea may get compressed by pathological
enlargements of the thyroid, the thymus, lymph
nodes and the aortic arch. This causes dyspnoea,
irritative cough, and often a husky voice.
Competency achievement: The student should be able to:
AN 23.1 Describe and demonstrate the external appearance,
relations, blood supply, nerve supply, lymphatic drainage and applied
anatomy of oesophagus.3
OESOPHAGUS
Features
The oesophagus is a narrow muscular tube, forming
the food passage between the pharynx and stomach. It
extends from the lower part of the neck to the upper
part of the abdomen (Fig. 20.2). The oesophagus is
about 25 cm long. The tube is flattened antero-
posteriorly and the lumen is kept collapsed; it dilates
only during the passage of the food bolus. The
pharyngo-oesophageal junction is the narrowest part
of the alimentary canal except for the vermiform
appendix.
The oesophagus begins in the neck at the lower
border of the cricoid cartilage, where it is continuous
with the lower end of the pharynx.
It descends in front of the vertebral column through
the superior and posterior parts of the mediastinum,
and pierces the diaphragm at the level of tenth thoracic
vertebra. It ends by opening into the stomach at its
cardiac end at the level of eleventh thoracic vertebra.
DISSECTION
Remove the posterior surface of the parietal pericardium
between the right and left pulmonary veins. This
uncovers the anterior surface of the oesophagus in the
posterior mediastinum.
Find the azygos vein and its tributaries on the
vertebral column to the right of the oesophagus. Find
and follow the thoracic duct on the left of azygos vein.
Identify the sternal, sternocostal, interchondral and
costochondral joints on the anterior aspect of chest wall
which was reflected downwards.
Expose the ligaments which unite the heads of the
ribs to the vertebral bodies and intervertebral discs.
Curvatures
In general, the oesophagus is vertical, but shows slight
curvatures in the following directions. There are two
Fig. 20.4: Various layers of wall of trachea
--- Page 347 ---
THORAX
Thorax
Section 2
side-to-side curvatures, both towards the left (see
Fig. 17.4). One is at the root of the neck and the other
near the lower end. It also has anteroposterior
curvatures that correspond to the curvatures of the
cervicothoracic spine.
Constrictions
Normally, the oesophagus shows four constrictions.
These are seen as indentations.
1 At its beginning, 15 cm/6-inch from the incisor teeth,
where it is crossed by cricopharyngeus muscle.
2 Where it is crossed by the aortic arch, 22.5 cm/9-inch
from the incisor teeth.
3 Where it is crossed by the left bronchus, 27.5 cm/11-
inch from the incisor teeth (Fig. 20.9).
4 Where it pierces the diaphragm 37.5 cm/15-inch from
the incisor teeth.
The distances from the incisor teeth are important
in passing instruments like endoscope into the
oesophagus.
For the sake of convenience, the relations of the
oesophagus may be studied in three parts—cervical,
thoracic and abdominal. The relations of the cervical
part are described in BD Chaurasia’s Human Anatomy,
Volume 3, and those of the abdominal part in Volume 2.
Relations of the Thoracic Part of the Oesophagus
Anteriorly
1 Trachea
2 Right pulmonary artery
3 Left bronchus
4 Pericardium with left atrium
5 The diaphragm (Figs 20.2 and 20.3).
Fig. 20.5: Structures in the posterior mediastinum seen after removal of the heart and pericardium
Posteriorly
1 Vertebral column
2 Right posterior intercostal arteries
3 Thoracic duct
4 Azygos vein with the terminal parts of the hemi-
azygos veins
5 Thoracic aorta
6 Right pleural recess
7 Diaphragm (Fig. 20.5)
To the Right
1 Right lung and pleura
2 Azygos vein
3 The right vagus (Figs 20.6a to c)
To the Left
1 Aortic arch
2 Left subclavian artery
3 Thoracic duct
4 Left lung and pleura
5 Left recurrent laryngeal nerve, all in the superior
mediastinum (see Figs 19.5 and 19.6)
In the posterior mediastinum, it is related to:
1 The descending thoracic aorta
2 The left lung and mediastinal pleura (see Fig. 16.3)
Arterial Supply
1 The cervical part including the segment up to the arch
of aorta is supplied by the inferior thyroid arteries.
2 The thoracic part is supplied by the oesophageal
branches of the aorta.
3 The abdominal part is supplied by the oesophageal
branches of the left gastric artery.
--- Page 348 ---
TRACHEA, OESOPHAGUS AND THORACIC DUCT
Thorax
Section 2
Venous Drainage
Blood from the upper part of the oesophagus drains
into the brachiocephalic veins; from the middle part it
goes to the azygos veins; and from the lower end it
goes to the left gastric vein and vena azygos via
hemiazygos vein. The lower end of the oesophagus is
one of the sites of portosystemic anastomoses.
Lymphatic Drainage
The cervical part drains to the deep cervical nodes; the
thoracic part to the posterior mediastinal nodes; and the
abdominal part to the left gastric nodes.
Nerve Supply
1 Parasympathetic nerves: The upper half of the
oesophagus is supplied by the recurrent laryngeal
nerves, and the lower half by the oesophageal plexus
formed mainly by the two vagi. Parasympathetic
nerves are sensory, motor and secretomotor to the
oesophagus.
2 Sympathetic nerves: For upper half of oesophagus,
the fibres come from middle cervical ganglion and
run with inferior thyroid arteries. For lower half,
the fibres come directly from upper four thoracic
ganglia, to form oesophageal plexus before
supplying the oesophagus. Sympathetic nerves are
vasomotor.
The oesophageal plexus is formed mainly by the
parasympathetic through vagi but sympathetic
fibres are also present. Towards the lower end of
the oesophagus; the vagal fibres form the anterior
and posterior gastric nerves which enter the
abdomen through the oesophageal opening of the
diaphragm.
Development
Described in Chapter 19 of BD Chaurasia’s Human
Anatomy, Volume 2.
HISTOLOGY OF OESOPHAGUS
The oesophagus is a muscular tube that rapidly propels
the food from pharynx into the stomach. It is about
25 cm long. The mucous membrane is thrown into
longitudinal folds when empty. The epithelium is
stratified squamous non-keratinised in character and
protective in function. The lamina propria sends
papillae into the epithelium. The muscularis mucosae
is indistinct at the beginning of oesophagus, but
becomes distinct lower down (Fig. 20.7). The
Figs 20.6a to c: Outline drawings of three sections through the
oesophagus at different levels of thoracic vertebrae
Fig. 20.7: Histology of oesophagus