
--- Page 16 ---
Introduction to the 
Upper Limb
CHAPTER
The upper limb is the organ of the body, responsible for 
manual activities. It is freely movable, especially its distal 
segment—the hand, which is adapted for grasping and 
manipulating the objects.
A brief description of comparative anatomy of the limbs 
would facilitate understanding of their structure and 
function.
All the terrestrial vertebrates possess four limbs—a pair of 
forelimbs and a pair of hindlimbs. In quadrupeds such as 
dogs and buffaloes, both forelimbs and hindlimbs are 
evolved for transmission of body weight and locomotion. In 
human beings, due to evolution of erect posture, the function 
of weight bearing and locomotion is performed only by the 
hind limbs (lower limbs), while upper limbs are spared for 
prehensile/manipulative activities, such as grasping, holding, 
picking, etc. (Fig. 1.1).
There are three types of grips: (a) power grip, (b) hook 
grip, and (c) precision grip. The power and hook grips are 
primitive in nature, hence found in higher primates. The 
precision grip is characteristic of human beings hence only 
humans can properly hold a pen, pencil, needles, 
instruments, etc. As a result, human beings could make 
advancements in arts, craft, and technology, of course, with 
the help of intelligence.
To suit the prehensile activities, the following changes 
took place in the upper limbs of humans during evolution:
1. Appearance of joints permitting rotatory movements of 
the forearm, viz. supination and pronation.
2. Addition of clavicle to act as a strut and keep upper limb 
away from the body for prehension.
3. Rotation of thumb to 90° for opposition.
4. Suitable changes for free mobility of the fingers and 
hand.
N.B. The human hand with its digits can perform complex 
skilled movements under the control of the brain. Hence man 
is considered as the master mechanic of the animal world. 
The disabling effects of an injury to the upper limb, particularly 
Fig. 1.1 Position of limbs: A, in quadrupeds; B, in humans.
Lower limbs
(hindlimbs)
Upper limb
(forelimb)
Hindlimbs
Forelimbs
--- Page 17 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
that of hand is far more than the extent of an injury. Therefore, 
a sound understanding of its structure and functions is of 
great clinical significance—the ultimate aim of treating any 
ailment of the upper limb being to restore its function.
The upper limbs are connected to the trunk by a pectoral 
girdle. The limb girdle is defined as the bones which connect 
the limbs to the axial skeleton. The pectoral girdle is 
composed of two bones – scapula and clavicle. The scapula is 
connected to the clavicle by the acromioclavicular joint, and 
the clavicle is attached to the axial skeleton by the 
sternoclavicular joint. The pectoral girdle is not a complete 
girdle because it is attached to the axial skeleton only 
anteriorly. The primary function of the pectoral girdle is to 
provide attachment to numerous muscles, which move the 
arm and forearm. It is not weight bearing and is, therefore, 
more delicate as compared to the pelvic girdle. Note that 
pelvic girdle is a complete girdle.
N.B. Only one small joint (sternoclavicular joint) connects 
the skeleton of upper limb to the rest of the skeleton of the 
body.
PARTS OF THE UPPER LIMB
For descriptive purposes, the upper limb is divided into the 
following four parts (Fig. 1.2):
1. Shoulder.
2. Arm or brachium.
3. Forearm or antebrachium.
4. Hand.
The shoulder region includes: (a) axilla or armpit, 
(b) scapular region or parts around the scapula (shoulder 
blade), and (c) pectoral or breast region on the front of the 
chest.
The bones of the shoulder region are the clavicle (collar 
bone) and the scapula (shoulder blade). They articulate with 
each other at the acromioclavicular joint and form the 
shoulder girdle. The shoulder girdle articulates with the rest 
of the skeleton of the body only at the small sternoclavicular 
joint.
The arm is the part of the upper limb between the 
shoulder and elbow (or cubitus). The bone of the arm is 
humerus, which articulates with the scapula at the 
shoulder joint and upper ends of radius and ulna at the 
elbow joint.
The forearm is the part of the upper limb between the 
elbow and the wrist. The bones of the forearm are radius and 
ulna. These bones articulate with humerus at the elbow joint 
and with each other forming radio-ulnar joints.
The hand (or manus) consists of the following parts: 
(a) wrist or carpus, (b) hand proper (or metacarpus), and 
(c) digits (thumb and fingers).
The wrist consists of eight carpal bones arranged in two 
rows, each consisting of four bones. The carpal bones 
articulate (a) with each other at intercarpal joints, 
(b) proximally with radius forming radio-carpal wrist 
joint, and (c) distally with metacarpal bones at 
carpometacarpal joints.
Clavicle
Shoulder
Scapula
Humerus
Ulna
Carpus (wrist)
Metacarpus
Phalanges
Hand
Forearm
(antebrachium)
(brachium)
Radius
Fig. 1.2 Parts of the upper limb.
--- Page 18 ---
Introduction to the Upper Limb
The hand proper consists of five metacarpal bones 
numbered one to five from lateral to medial side in 
anatomical position. They articulate (a) proximally with 
distal row of carpal bones forming carpometacarpal 
joints, (b) with each other forming intermetacarpal joints, 
and (c) distally with proximal phalanges forming 
metacarpophalangeal joints.
The digits are five and numbered 1 to 5 from lateral to 
medial side. The first digit is called thumb and remaining 
four digits are fingers. Each digit is supported by three 
short long bones—the phalanges except thumb, which is 
supported by only two phalanges. The phalanges form 
metacarpophalangeal 
joints 
with 
metacarpals 
interphalangeal joints with one another. The first 
carpometacarpal joint has a separate joint cavity hence 
movements of thumb are much more free than that of any 
digit/finger.
N.B. The functional value of thumb is immense. For 
example, in grasping, the functional value of thumb is equal 
to other four digits/fingers. Therefore, loss of thumb alone is 
as disabling as the loss of all four fingers.
The subdivisions, bones and joints of different parts of 
the upper limb are summarized in Table 1.1.
COMPARISON AND CONTRAST BETWEEN
THE UPPER AND LOWER LIMBS
Both the upper and lower limbs are built on the same basic 
principle. Each limb is made up of two portions: proximal 
and distal.
The proximal part is called limb girdle and attaches the 
limb to the trunk. The distal part is free and consists of 
proximal, middle, and distal segments, which are referred to 
as arm, forearm, and hand respectively in the upper limb, 
and thigh, leg, and foot respectively in the lower limb. The 
homologous parts of the upper and lower limbs are 
enumerated in Table 1.2.
A short account of the development of the limbs further 
makes it easier to understand the differences between the 
upper and lower limbs (Fig. 1.3).
The development of upper and lower limbs begins in the 
4th week of intrauterine life (IUL). A pair of small elevations 
appears on the ventrolateral aspect of the embryo called limb 
buds. The anterior pair of the upper limb buds appears 
opposite the lower cervical segments. The posterior pair of 
lower limb buds appears 3 or 4 days later at the level of 
lumbar and upper sacral segments. Thus during an early 
stage of development all the four limbs appear as paired limb 
buds. First they are simple flipper-like appendages so that the 
upper and lower limbs are similar in their appearance. Each 
has dorsal and ventral surfaces, and preaxial and postaxial 
borders. The preaxial border faces towards the head. Later in 
Table 1.1 Parts of the upper limb
Part
Subdivisions
Bones
Joints
Shoulder region
• Pectoral region
• Axilla
• Scapular region
• Clavicle
• Scapula
• Sternoclavicular
• Acromioclavicular
Humerus
Shoulder
Forearm
• Radius
• Ulna
• Elbow
• Radio-ulnar
Hand
• Wrist (carpus)
• Carpal bones
– Wrist/radio-carpal
– Intercarpal
• Hand proper (metacarpus)
• Metacarpal bones
– Carpometacarpal
– Intermetacarpal
• Digits
• Phalanges
– Metacarpophalangeal
– Proximal and distal interphalangeal
Table 1.2 Homologous parts of the upper and lower limbs
Upper limb
Lower limb
Shoulder/pectoral girdle
Hip girdle/pelvic girdle
Shoulder joint
Hip joint
Thigh
Elbow joint
Knee joint
Forearm
Wrist joint
Ankle joint
Hand
(a) Carpus
(b) Metacarpus
(c) Fingers*
Foot
(a) Tarsus
(b) Metatarsus
(c) Toes*
*First digit in hand is termed thumb and first digit in foot is termed great 
toe.
--- Page 19 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
Lower
limb bud
Big toe
Thumb
Upper
limb bud
90° lateral
rotation
90° medial rotation
Big toe
Thumb
Fig. 1.3 Development of the limbs.
Table 1.3 Differences between the upper and lower limbs
Upper limb
Lower limb
Function
Prehension (i.e., manipulation of objects by 
grasping)
Locomotion and transmission of weight
Bones
Smaller and weaker
Larger and stronger
Joints
Smaller and less stable
Larger and more stable
Muscles
• Smaller and attached to smaller bony areas
• Antigravity muscles less developed
• Larger and attached to larger bony areas
• Antigravity muscles more developed
Girdle
Pectoral girdle
(a) Made up of two bones, clavicle and scapula
(b) No articulation with vertebral column
(c) Articulation with axial skeleton is very small 
through sternoclavicular joint
Pelvic girdle
(a) Made up of single bone, the hip bone*
(b) Articulates with vertebral column
(c) Articulation with axial skeleton is large, through 
sacroiliac joint
Preaxial border
Faces laterally
Faces medially
*The hip bone essentially consists of three components: ilium, ischium, and pubis, which later fuse to form a single bone.
the development, the ends of limb buds become expanded 
and flattened to form the hand and foot plates in which the 
digits develop. The digits nearest to the preaxial border are 
thumb and big toe in the upper and lower limbs, respectively. 
The limbs then rotate.
The lower limb buds rotate medially through 90° so that 
their preaxial border faces medially and their extensor 
surface faces forwards. The upper limb buds on the other 
hand rotate laterally through 90° so that their preaxial border 
faces laterally their extensor surface faces backwards.
The differences between the upper and lower limbs are 
listed in Table 1.3.
TRANSMISSION OF FORCE IN THE
UPPER LIMB (Fig. 1.4)
The pectoral girdle on each side consists of two bones: 
clavicle and scapula, only clavicle is attached to the rest of 
skeleton by a small joint—the sternoclavicular joint. The two 
bones of girdle are joined together by even smaller joint, the 
acromioclavicular joint. The clavicle is attached to the 
scapula by a strong coracoclavicular ligament (strongest 
ligament in the upper limb), and the clavicle is anchored to 
the 1st costal cartilage by the costoclavicular ligament.
--- Page 20 ---
Introduction to the Upper Limb
Fig. 1.4 Transmission of force in the upper limb.
Interosseous
membrane
Humero-ulnar joint
Acromioclavicular
joint
Costoclavicular
ligament
Ulna
Radius
Humerus
Scapula
Clavicle
Sternoclavicular 
joint
Coracoclavicular
ligament
Radius
Wrist joint
Hand
Force
Humerus
Elbow joint
Interosseous 
membrane
Ulna
Shoulder joint
Clavicle
Coracoclavicular ligament
Scapula
Sternoclavicular joint
costoclavicular ligament
Axial skeleton
Flowchart 1.1 Lines of force transmission in the upper limb.
Forces of the upper limb are transmitted to the axial 
skeleton by clavicle through costoclavicular ligament and 
sternoclavicular joint. The lines of force transmission in the 
upper limb are shown in Flowchart 1.1.
BONES OF THE UPPER LIMB 
They are already described with parts of the upper limb (for 
details see Page 2).
MUSCLES OF THE UPPER LIMB
The muscles of upper limb include (a) the muscles that 
attach the limb and girdle to the body and (b) the muscles of 
arm, forearm, and hand. The deltoid muscle covers the 
shoulder like a hood and is commonly used for intramuscular 
injections.
The arm and forearm are invested in the deep fascia like a 
sleeve and are divided into anterior and posterior 
compartments by intermuscular septa. The muscles of 
anterior 
posterior 
compartments 
mainly 
synergistically to carry out specific functions. The muscles of 
anterior compartment are mainly flexors and those of 
posterior compartment extensors.
The muscles of hand are responsible for its various skilled 
movements such as grasping, etc.
NERVES OF THE UPPER LIMB (Fig. 1.5)
The nerve supply to the upper limb is derived from the 
brachial plexus (formed by ventral rami of C5 to C8 and T1 
spinal nerves). The five main branches of brachial plexus 
are axillary, musculocutaneous, median, ulnar, and radial 
nerves.
 
 The axillary nerve supplies the deltoid and teres minor 
muscles.
--- Page 21 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
 The musculocutaneous, median, and ulnar nerves supply 
the muscles of anterior (flexor) compartments of the arm 
and forearm.
 
 The radial nerve supplies the muscles of the posterior 
(extensor) compartments of the arm and forearm.
N.B. All the intrinsic muscles of the hand are supplied by 
the ulnar nerve except muscles of thenar eminence and first 
two lumbricals.
ARTERIES OF THE UPPER LIMB (Fig. 1.6)
The blood to the upper limb is supplied by four main 
arteries: axillary, brachial, radial, and ulnar.
The axillary is the continuation of subclavian artery. At 
the lower border of the teres major muscle its name is 
changed to brachial artery. The brachial artery continues 
down the arm and just distal to the elbow joint, it divides 
into radial and ulnar arteries, which follow the bones, after 
which they are named. In the hand, radial artery terminates 
by forming the deep palmar arch and ulnar artery terminates 
by forming the superficial palmar arch.
 
 The axillary artery supplies the shoulder region.
 
 The brachial artery supplies the anterior and posterior 
compartments of the arm.
 
 The radial and ulnar arteries supply the lateral and medial 
parts of the forearm, respectively.
Axillary nerve
Radial nerve
Ulnar nerve
Median nerve
Ulnar nerve
Deep branch of
radial nerve
(posterior interosseous 
nerve)
Superficial branch of
radial nerve
(superficial
radial nerve)
Radial nerve
Musculocutaneous
nerve
Deep branch of
radial nerve
(posterior interosseous
nerve)
Fig. 1.5 Main nerves of the upper limb. A, anterior aspect; B, posterior aspect.
--- Page 22 ---
Introduction to the Upper Limb
VEINS OF THE UPPER LIMB
The deep veins of the upper limb follow the arteries and run 
superiorly towards the axilla, where axillary vein travels 
superiorly and becomes subclavian vein at the outer border 
of the 1st rib. The subclavian vein continues towards the root 
of the neck where it joins the internal jugular vein to form 
the brachiocephalic vein. The two brachiocephalic veins 
(right and left) join each other to form superior vena cava, 
which drains into the heart.
The superficial veins of the upper limb originate from 
the dorsal venous arch of the hand. The lateral end of the 
dorsal venous arch forms the cephalic vein, which runs 
along the lateral aspect of the upper limb and terminates 
into the axillary vein in the axilla. The medial end of the 
dorsal venous arch forms the basilic vein, which ascends 
along the medial aspect of the upper limb and empties into 
the axillary vein as well. Anterior to the elbow, the cephalic 
vein is connected to the basilic vein via the median cubital 
vein.
LYMPHATICS OF THE UPPER LIMB
The lymphatics of the upper limb originate in the hand. The 
superficial lymph vessels follow the superficial veins. The 
deep lymph vessels follow the deep arteries (viz. radial, ulnar, 
and brachial) and pass superiorly to the axilla where they 
drain into the axillary lymph nodes.
Fig. 1.6 Arteries of the upper limb.
Common carotid artery
Brachiocephalic artery/trunk
Axillary artery
Profunda brachii artery
Ulnar artery
Deep palmar arch
Superficial palmar arch
Radial artery
Subclavian artery
Brachial artery
--- Page 23 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
– Nerve injuries: The common nerve injuries in the upper 
limb are injuries of brachial plexus, median nerve, radial 
nerve, and ulnar nerve. The compression of median 
nerve at wrist is most common peripheral neuropathy in 
the body. The three major nerves of the upper limb (e.g., 
radial, median, and ulnar) have predilection of 
involvement in leprosy. The ulnar nerve can be easily 
palpated behind the medial epicondyle of the humerus.
• Sites for the intramuscular and intravenous injections: 
– The intramuscular injection is most commonly given in 
the shoulder region in deltoid muscle;
– intravenous injection is most commonly given in the 
superficial veins in front of elbow and the dorsum of 
hand.
• Sites for feeli ng arterial pulsations: The arterial pulsation 
is most commonly felt and auscultated on the medial side 
of the front of elbow for recording of blood pressure. The 
arterial pulse is most commonly felt on the lateral side of 
the front of distal forearm of recording pulse rate.
• Injuries of the upper limb: The human upper limb is 
meant for prehension, i.e., grasping, and not for locomotion 
and transmission of weight. The mechanism of grasping is 
provided by hand with the four fingers flexing against the 
opposable thumb. The upper limb is therefore light built, 
i.e., its bones are smaller and weaker, joints are smaller 
and less stable, etc. Hence, it is more prone to injuries 
such as dislocation, fractures, etc.
– Dislocations: The common dislocations in the upper 
limb are dislocations of shoulder joint (most commonly 
dislocated joint in the body), elbow joint, and lunate 
bone of the hand.
– Fractures: The common fractures in the upper limb 
are fracture of clavicle (most commonly fractured 
bone in the body), humerus, radius, and scaphoid. 
The scaphoid is the most commonly fractured bone of 
the hand.
Clinical correlation
--- Page 24 ---
Introduction to the Upper Limb
Golden Facts to Remember
  Most important function of hand
Prehension (i.e., grasping)
  Most important feature of human hand
Opposition of thumb and precision grip
  Only point of bony contact between the upper 
limb and chest
Sternoclavicular joint
  Part of the upper limb having largest 
representation in the brain
Hand
  Most important digit of the hand
Thumb
--- Page 25 ---
Bones of the Upper Limb
CHAPTER
The study of bones of the upper limb is important to 
understand the general topography of the upper limb and 
the attachment of various muscles and ligaments. The 
students must read the features and attachments of the bones 
before undertaking the study of the upper limb.
The study of bones also helps to understand the position 
of various articulations, wide range of the movements 
executed by the upper limb and the genesis of various 
fractures, which are common in the upper limb bones.
Each upper limb contains 32 bones (Fig. 2.1), viz.
 
 Scapula, the shoulder blade (1). 
 Bones of the pectoral
 
 Clavicle, the collar bone (1). 
girdle
 
 Humerus, the bone of arm (1).
 
 Radius and ulna, the bones of forearm (2).
 
 Carpal bones, the bones of wrist (8).
 
 Metacarpals, the bones of hand (5).
 
 Phalanges, the bones of digits (fingers) (14).
CLAVICLE
The clavicle (L. clavicle = key) or collar bone is the long bone, 
with a slight S-shaped curve. It is located horizontally on the 
anterior aspect of the body at the junction of root of the neck 
and trunk. It articulates medially with the sternum and 1st 
rib cartilage and laterally with the acromion process of the 
scapula. It is subcutaneous and hence it can be palpated 
through its entire extent. It is the only bony attachment 
between the trunk and upper limb.
FUNCTIONS
The functions of the clavicle are as follows:
1. It acts as a strut for holding the upper limb far from the 
trunk so that it can move freely. This allows free swing of 
the upper limb for various prehensile acts such as 
holding, catching, etc.
Fig. 2.1 Bones of the upper limb.
Carpal bones (8)
Ulna (1)
Metacarpals (5)
Phalanges (14)
Wrist joint
Radius (1)
Elbow joint
Humerus (1)
Scapula (1)
Sternoclavicular
joint
Clavicle (1)
Shoulder joint
--- Page 26 ---
Bones of the Upper Limb
Fig. 2.2 Right clavicle: A, superior aspect; B, inferior aspect.
Shaft
Conoid
tubercle
Subclavian groove
(groove for
subclavius muscle)
Rough impression for
costoclavicular ligament
Acromial end
Sternal end
Trapezoid ridge
Sternal end
Acromial end
Ant.
Post.
Lat.
Med.
Ant.
Post.
Lat.
Med.
2. It transmits forces from the upper limb to the axial 
skeleton (sternum).
3. It provides an area for the attachment of muscles.
PECULIARITIES
The peculiar features of the clavicle are as follows:
1. It is the only long bone which lies horizontally.
2. It has no medullary cavity.
3. It is subcutaneous throughout its extent.
4. It is the first bone to start ossifying (between the fifth 
and sixth week of intrauterine life) and last bone to 
complete its ossification (at 25 years).
5. It is the only long bone which ossifies by two primary 
centers.
6. It is the only long bone which ossifies in membrane 
except for its medial end (cf. long bones ossify in 
cartilage).
7. It may be pierced through and through by cutaneous 
nerve (intermediate supraclavicular nerve).
PARTS
The clavicle consists of three parts: two ends (medial and 
lateral) and a shaft (Fig. 2.2):
Ends
1. The lateral (acromial) end is flattened above downwards 
and articulates with medial margin of the acromion 
process.
2. The medial (sternal) end is enlarged and quadrilateral. 
It articulates with the clavicular notch of the manubrium 
sterni.
Shaft
The shaft is curved. Its medial two-third is round and convex 
forwards, and its lateral one-third is flattened and concave 
forwards. The inferior surface of the shaft possesses a small 
longitudinal groove in its middle third.
ANATOMICAL POSITION AND SIDE DETERMINATION
The side of clavicle can be determined by holding the bone 
horizontally in such a way that its flattened end is on the 
lateral side and its enlarged quadrilateral end is on the 
medial side. The convexity of its medial two-third and 
concavity of its lateral one-third face forwards with 
longitudinal groove in the middle third of shaft facing 
inferiorly.
FEATURES AND ATTACHMENTS (Fig. 2.3)
Lateral End/Acromial End
It is flattened above downwards. An oval facet on this end 
articulates with the facet on the medial margin of the 
acromion to form acromioclavicular joint. The lateral end 
provides attachment to fibrous capsule of acromioclavicular 
joint.
Medial End/Sternal End
The enlarged medial end has a saddle-shaped articular 
surface, which articulates with the clavicular notch of 
manubrium sterni to form sternoclavicular joint. It provides 
attachment to (a) fibrous capsule (b) articular disc, and 
(c) interclavicular ligament.
--- Page 27 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
Shaft
The shaft of the clavicle is divided into two parts: lateral one-
third and medial two-third. The medial two-third of shaft is 
convex forward and lateral one-third is concave forward.
Lateral One-third
It is flattened from above downwards. It has two surfaces, i.e., 
superior and inferior, and two borders, i.e., anterior and 
posterior.
Surfaces
Superior surface: It is subcutaneous between the attachments 
of deltoid and trapezius.
Inferior surface: It presents a conoid tubercle and 
trapezoid ridge, which provide attachments to conoid and 
trapezoid parts of coracoclavicular ligament, respectively.
The conoid tubercle is located on the inferior surface near 
the posterior border at the junction of the lateral one-fourth 
and medial three-fourth of the clavicle. The trapezoid ridge 
extends forwards and laterally from conoid tubercle.
Borders
Anterior border: It is concave forwards and gives origin to 
deltoid muscle. A small tubercle called deltoid tubercle may 
be present on this border.
Posterior border: It is convex backwards and provides 
insertion to the trapezius muscle.
Medial Two-third
It is cylindrical in shape and presents four surfaces: anterior, 
posterior, superior, and inferior.
Anterior surface: It is convex forwards and gives origin to 
clavicular head of pectoralis major.
Posterior surface: It is concave backwards and gives origin 
to sternohyoid muscle near its medial end. The lateral part of 
this surface forms the anterior boundary of cervico-axillary 
canal and is related to the following structures:
1. Trunks of brachial plexus.
2. Third part of subclavian artery.
Superior surface: The clavicular head of sternocleido-
mastoid muscle originates from medial half of this surface.
Inferior surface: It presents the following features:
1. Costoclavicular ligament is attached to an oval 
impression at its medial end.
2. Subclavius muscle is inserted into the subclavian groove 
on this surface.
3. Clavipectoral fascia is attached to the margins of 
subclavian groove.
4. Nutrient foramen of clavicle is located on the lateral end 
of the subclavian groove.
The muscles and ligaments attached to the clavicle are 
given in Table 2.1.
Deltoid
Pectoralis major
Sternocleidomastoid
Trapezius
Deltoid
Capsule of 
acromioclavicular
joint
Capsule of 
sternoclavicular
joint
Pectoralis major
Trapezius
Trapezoid
part
Conoid
part
Subclavius
Costoclavicular
ligament
Coracoclavicular
ligament
Articular
surface for
acromion
Articular
facet for
manubrium
Ant.
Post.
Lat.
Med.
Ant.
Post.
Lat.
Med.
Fig. 2.3 Right clavicle showing attachments of the muscles and ligaments: A, superior surface; B, inferior surface.
Table 2.1 Muscles and ligaments attached to the clavicle
Muscles
Ligaments
Pectoralis major
Coracoclavicular
Sternocleidomastoid (clavicular head)
Costoclavicular
Deltoid
Interclavicular
Trapezius
Subclavius
--- Page 28 ---
Bones of the Upper Limb
OSSIFICATION (Fig. 2.5)
The ossification of clavicle is membranocartilaginous. 
Whole of it ossifies in the membrane except its medial end 
which ossifies in the cartilage. The clavicle begins to ossify 
before any other bone in the body. It ossifies by four 
ossification centres – two primary centres for shaft and two 
secondary centres, one for each end.
The site of appearance, time of appearance, and time of 
fusion of various centres is given in the Table 2.2.
N.B. Growing end of clavicle: The sternal end of clavicle is 
its growing end, because epiphysis at this end appears at 
the age of 19–20 years and unites with the shaft at the age 
of 25 years. It is the last of all the epiphyses in the body to 
fuse with the shaft. The radiological appearance of this 
epiphysis in females confirms their bone age for legal 
consent to marriage.
Congenital anomalies:
• Clavicular dysostosis: It is a clinical condition in which 
medial and lateral parts of clavicle remain separate due to 
nonunion of two primary centers of ossification.
• Cleidocranial dysostosis: It is a clinical condition 
characterized by partial or complete absence of clavicle 
associated with defective ossification of the skull bones.
Clinical correlation
Fracture of clavicle (Fig. 2.4): The clavicle is the most 
commonly fractured bone in the body. It commonly fractures 
at the junction of its lateral one-third and medial two-third 
due to blows to the shoulder or indirect forces, usually as a 
result of strong impact on the hand or shoulder, when 
person falls on the outstretched hand or the shoulder. When 
fracture occurs, the lateral fragment is displaced downward 
by the weight of the upper limb because trapezius alone is 
unable to support the weight of the upper limb. In addition, 
the lateral fragment is drawn medially by shoulder adductors 
viz. teres major, etc. The medial fragment is slightly elevated 
by the sternocleidomastoid muscle. The characteristic 
clinical picture of the patient with fractured clavicle is that of 
a man/woman supporting his sagging upper limb with the 
opposite hand. The fracture at the junction of lateral one-
third and medial two-third occurs because: 
(a) This is the weakest site.
(b) Two curvatures of clavicle meet at this site.
(c) The transmission of forces (due to impact) from the 
clavicle to scapula occur at this site through 
coracoclavicular ligament.
Clinical correlation
N.B. 
• The clavicle is absent in animals in which the upper limbs 
are used only for walking and weight transmission, and 
not for grasping such as horse, etc.
• One of the two primary centers of clavicle is regarded as 
precoracoid element of reptilian shoulder girdle.
Fig. 2.4 Clavicle fracture: A, medial fragment; B, lateral 
fragment. (Source: Fig. 2.1, Page 51, Clinical and Surgical 
Anatomy, 2e, Vishram Singh. Copyright Elsevier 2007, All 
rights reserved.)
Acromial
Sternal
Two primary
centres
Secondary centre
at the acromial end
(occasional)
Secondary centre
at the sternal end
Fig. 2.5 Ossification of the clavicle.
Sternocleidomastoid
Muscle spasm
(Teres major and
Pectoralis major)
Table 2.2 Ossification centers of the clavicle
Site of appearance
Time of appearance
Time of fusion
Two primary centres 
(medial and lateral) in 
the shaft
5–6 weeks of 
intrauterine life 
(IUL)
45th day of 
Secondary centre at 
sternal end
19–20 years (2 years 
earlier in female)
25th year
Secondary centre at the 
acromial end 
(occasional)
20th year
Fuses 
immediately
--- Page 29 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
Medial border
Superior angle
Oblique ridges for
attachment of
small intramuscular
tendons of subscapularis
Superior border
Spinous process
Suprascapular
notch
Coracoid process
Inferior angle
Lateral border
Infraglenoid tubercle
Acromion process
Glenoid cavity
(lateral angle)
Supraglenoid tubercle
Later border of acromion
Facet for acromioclavicular joint
Lateral border
Acromion process
Spine/spinous process
Upper lip of spine
Lower lip of spine
Supraspinous fossa
Infraspinous fossa
Medial border
Suprascapular notch
Suprascapular nerve
Infraglenoid tubercle
Spinoglenoid notch
Fig. 2.6 Right scapula: A, anterior aspect; B, posterior aspect.
--- Page 30 ---
Bones of the Upper Limb
SCAPULA
The scapula (shoulder blade) is a large, flattened, and 
triangular bone located on the upper part of the posterolateral 
aspect of the thorax, against 2nd to 7th ribs.
PARTS (Fig. 2.6)
The scapula is highly mobile and consists of four parts: a 
body and three processes—spinous, acromion, and coracoid.
N.B. Some authorities divide scapula into three parts, viz. 
head, neck, and body.
Body
The body is triangular, thin, and transparent. It presents the 
following features:
1. Two surfaces: (a) costal and (b) dorsal.
2. Three borders: (a) superior, (b) lateral, and (c) medial.
3. Three angles: (a) inferior, (b) superior, and (c) lateral.
The dorsal surface presents a shelf-like projection on its 
upper part called spinous process.
The lateral angle is truncated to form an articular 
surface—the glenoid cavity.
The lateral angle is thickened and called head of the 
scapula, which is connected to the plate-like body by an 
inconspicuous neck.
Processes
There are three processes. These are as follows:
1. Spinous process.
2. Acromion process.
3. Coracoid process.
The spinous process is a shelf-like bony projection on the 
dorsal aspect of the body.
The acromion process projects forwards almost at right 
angle from the lateral end of the spine.
The coracoid process is like a bird’s beak. It arises from 
the upper border of the head and bends sharply to project 
superoanteriorly.
ANATOMICAL POSITION AND SIDE DETERMINATION
The side of the scapula can be determined by holding the 
scapula in such a way that:
1. The glenoid cavity faces laterally, forwards, and slightly 
upwards (at an angle of 45° from the coronal plane).
2. The coracoid process is directed forwards.
3. The shelf-like spinous process is directed posteriorly.
FEATURES AND ATTACHMENTS (Fig. 2.7)
Surfaces
Costal surface (subscapular fossa)
1. It is concave and directed medially and forwards.
2. It 
presents 
three 
longitudinal 
ridges, 
which 
provide attachment to the intramuscular tendons of 
subscapularis muscle.
3. The subscapularis muscle (a multipennate muscle) 
arises from the medial two-third of subscapular fossa/ 
costal surface except near the neck where a subscapular 
bursa intervenes between the neck and the subscapular 
tendon.
4. The serratus anterior muscle is inserted on this surface 
along the medial border and inferior angle.
Dorsal surface
1. The dorsal surface is convex and presents a shelf-like 
projection called spinous process.
2. The spinous process divides the dorsal surface into 
supraspinous and infraspinous fossae. The upper, 
supraspinous fossa is smaller (one-third) and lower, 
infraspinous fossa is larger (two-third).
3. The spinoglenoid notch lies between lateral border of 
the spinous process and the dorsal surface of the neck of 
scapula. Through this notch supraspinous fossa 
communicates with the infraspinous fossa and 
suprascapular nerve and vessels pass from supraspinous 
fossa to the infraspinous fossa.
4. The supraspinatus muscle arises from medial two-third 
of supraspinous fossa.
5. The infraspinatus muscle arises from medial two-third 
of infraspinous fossa.
6. The teres minor muscle arises from the upper two-third 
of the dorsal surface of lateral border. This origin is 
interrupted by the circumflex scapular artery.
7. The teres major muscle arises from the lower one-third 
of the dorsal surface of lateral border and inferior angle 
of scapula.
8. The latissimus dorsi muscle also arises from dorsal 
surface of the inferior angle by a small slip.
Borders
Superior border
1. The superior border is the shortest border and extends 
between superior and lateral angles.
2. The suprascapular notch is present on this border near 
the root of coracoid process.
3. The suprascapular notch is converted into suprascapular 
foramen by superior transverse (suprascapular) ligament.
--- Page 31 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
Fig. 2.7 Right scapula showing attachments of the muscles and ligaments: A, costal surface; B, dorsal surface.
Inferior angle
Serratus anterior
Superior angle
Inferior belly of omohyoid
Coracoclavicular ligament
Pectoralis minor
Subscapularis
Long head of triceps
Glenoid cavity
(lateral angle)
Short head of
biceps brachii and
coracobrachialis
Coracoacromial
ligament
Inferior angle
Superior angle
Coracoacromial ligament
Deltoid
Trapezius
Glenoid cavity
(lateral angle)
Long head of triceps
Teres minor
Circumflex scapular artery
Teres major
Latissimus dorsi
Rhomboideus major
Rhomboideus minor
Supraspinatus
Levator scapulae
Infraspinatus
Suprascapular ligament
Capsule of
shoulder joint
Capsule of shoulder joint
Suprascapular ligament
--- Page 32 ---
Bones of the Upper Limb
4. The suprascapular artery passes above the ligament and 
suprascapular nerve passes below the ligament, through 
suprascapular foramen. (Mnemonic: Air force flies above 
the Navy, i.e., A: artery is above and N: nerve is below the 
ligament.)
5. The inferior belly of omohyoid arises from the superior 
border near the suprascapular notch.
Lateral border
1. The lateral border is the thickest border and extends 
from inferior angle to the glenoid cavity.
2. The infraglenoid tubercle is present at its upper end, 
just below the glenoid cavity.
3. The long head of triceps muscle arises from the infra-
glenoid tubercle.
N.B. Lateral border of scapula is thick because it acts as 
fulcrum during rotation of the scapula.
Medial border (vertebral border)
1. It extends from superior angle to the inferior angle.
2. It is thin and angled at the root of spine of scapula.
3. The serratus anterior muscle is inserted on the costal 
surface of the medial border and the inferior angle.
4. The levator scapulae muscle is inserted on the dorsal 
aspect of the medial border from superior angle to the 
root of spine.
5. The rhomboideus minor muscle is inserted on the 
dorsal aspect of the medial border opposite the root of 
spine.
6. The rhomboideus major muscle is inserted on the dorsal 
aspect of the medial border from the root of spine to the 
inferior angle.
Angles
Inferior angle: It lies over the 7th rib or the 7th intercostal 
space.
Superior angle: It is at the junction of superior and medial 
borders, and lies over the 2nd rib.
Lateral angle (head of scapula)
1. It is truncated and bears a pear-shaped articular cavity 
called the glenoid cavity, which articulates with the head 
of humerus to form glenohumeral (shoulder) joint.
2. A fibrocartilaginous rim, the glenoid labrum is attached 
to the margins of glenoid cavity to deepen its concavity.
3. The capsule of shoulder joint is attached to the margins 
of glenoid cavity, proximal to the attachment of glenoid 
labrum.
4. The long head of biceps brachii arises from supraglenoid 
tubercle. This origin is intracapsular.
Processes
Spinous process (spine of scapula)
1. It is a triangular shelf-like bony projection, attached to 
the dorsal surface of scapula at the junction of its upper 
one-third and lower two-third.
2. It divides the dorsal surface of scapula into two parts—
upper supraspinous fossa and lower infraspinous fossa.
The spine has two surfaces—(a) superior and (b) inferior, 
and three borders—(a) anterior, (b) posterior, and 
(c) lateral.
Surfaces
(a) The superior surface of spine forms the lower boundary 
of supraspinous fossa and gives origin to supraspinatus.
(b) The inferior surface of spine forms the upper limit of 
infraspinous fossa and gives origin to infraspinatus.
Borders
(a) The anterior border of spine is attached to the dorsal 
surface of scapula.
(b) The lateral border of spine bounds the spinoglenoid 
notch through which pass suprascapular nerve and 
vessels from supraspinous fossa to infraspinous fossa.
(c) The posterior border of spine is also called crest of spine. 
Trapezius is inserted to the upper lip of crest of spine, 
while posterior fibres of deltoid take origin from its 
lower lip.
Acromion process (acromion)
1. It projects forwards almost at right angle from the lateral 
end of spine and overhangs the glenoid cavity.
2. Its superior surface is subcutaneous.
3. It has a tip, two borders (medial and lateral), and two 
surfaces (superior and inferior).
4. The medial and lateral borders of acromion continue 
with the upper and lower lips of the crest of the spine of 
scapula, respectively.
5. Its superior surface is rough and subcutaneous.
6. Its inferior surface is smooth and related to subacromial 
bursa.
7. The medial border of acromion provides insertion to 
the trapezius muscle. Near the tip, medial border 
presents a circular facet, which articulates with the 
lateral end of clavicle to form the acromioclavicular 
joint.
8. The lateral border of acromion gives origin to 
intermediate fibres of the deltoid muscle.
9. The coracoacromial ligament is attached to the tip of 
acromion.
10. The acromial angle is at the junction of lateral border of 
acromion and lateral border of the crest of the spine of 
scapula.
--- Page 33 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
Coracoid process
1. It arises from the upper part of the head of scapula and 
bent sharply so as to project forwards and slightly 
laterally.
2. The coracoid process provides attachment to three 
muscles—short head of biceps brachii, coracobrachialis, 
pectoralis 
minor, 
three 
ligaments—
coracoacromial, coracoclavicular, and coracohumeral.
3. The short head of biceps brachii and coracobrachialis arise 
from its tip by a common tendon.
4. The pectoralis minor muscle is inserted on the medial 
border of the upper surface.
5. The coracoacromial ligament is attached to its lateral 
border.
6. The conoid part of the coracoclavicular ligament
(rhomboid ligament) is attached to its knuckle.
7. The trapezoid part of the coracoclavicular ligament
(rhomboid ligament) is attached to a ridge on its 
superior aspect between the pectoralis minor muscle 
and coracoacromial ligament.
8. The coracohumeral ligament is attached to its root 
adjacent to the glenoid cavity.
N.B.
• In living individual, the tip of coracoid process can be 
palpated 2.5 cm below the junction of lateral one-fourth 
and medial three-fourth of the clavicle.
• In reptiles, coracoid process is a separate bone, but in 
humans it is attached to scapula and thus it represents 
atavistic epiphysis.
OSSIFICATION
The ossification of scapula is cartilaginous. The cartilaginous 
scapula is ossified by eight centres—one primary and seven 
secondary.
The primary centre appears in the body.
The secondary centres appear as follows:
1. Two centres appear in the coracoid process.
2. Two centres appear in the acromion process.
3. One centre appears each in the (a) medial border, 
(b) inferior angle, and (c) in the lower part of the rim of 
glenoid cavity.
The primary centre in the body and first secondary centre 
in the coracoid process appears in eighth week of 
intrauterine life (IUL) and first year of postnatal life, 
respectively and they fuse at the age of 15 years.
All other secondary centres appear at about puberty and 
fuse by 20th year.
N.B. First coracoid centre represents precoracoid element 
and second coracoid (subcoracoid) centre represents 
coracoid proper of reptilian girdle.
Sprengel’s deformity of the scapula (congenital high 
scapula): The scapula develops in the neck region during 
intrauterine life and then migrates downwards to its adult 
position (i.e., upper part of the back of the chest). Failure 
of descent leads to Sprengel’s deformity of the scapula. In 
this condition the scapula is hypoplastic and situated in the 
neck region. It may be connected to the cervical part of 
vertebral column by a fibrous, cartilaginous, or bony bar 
called omovertebral body. An attempt to bring down 
scapula by a surgical procedure may cause injury to the 
brachial plexus.
Clinical correlation
HUMERUS
The humerus is the bone of arm. It is the longest and 
strongest bone of the upper limb.
PARTS (Fig. 2.8)
The humerus is a long bone and consists of three parts: 
upper end, lower end, and shaft.
Upper End
The upper end presents the following five features:
1. Head.
2. Neck.
3. Greater tubercle.
4. Lesser tubercle.
5. Intertubercular sulcus.
The head is smooth and rounded, and forms less than half 
of a sphere. It is directed medially backwards and upwards. It 
articulates with the glenoid cavity of scapula to form the 
glenohumeral (shoulder) joint.
Lower End
The lower end presents the following seven features:
1. Capitulum, a lateral rounded convex projection.
2. Trochlea, a medial pulley-shaped structure.
3. Radial fossa, a small fossa above the capitulum.
4. Coronoid fossa, a small fossa above the trochlea.
5. Medial epicondyle, a prominent projection on the 
medial side.
6. Lateral epicondyle, a prominent projection on the 
lateral side but less than the medial epicondyle.
7. Olecranon fossa, a large, deep hollow on the posterior 
aspect above the trochlea.
Shaft
The shaft is a long part of bone extending between its upper 
and lower ends. It is cylindrical in the upper half and 
flattened anteroposteriorly in the lower half.
--- Page 34 ---
Bones of the Upper Limb
ANATOMICAL POSITION AND SIDE DETERMINATION
The side of humerus can be determined by holding it 
vertically in such a way that:
1. The rounded head at the upper end faces medially, 
backwards and upwards.
2. The lesser tubercle, greater tubercle, and vertical groove 
(intertubercular groove) at the upper end faces 
anteriorly.
3. The olecranon fossa on the lower flattened end faces 
posteriorly.
FEATURES AND ATTACHMENTS (Fig. 2.9)
Upper End Head
1. It is smooth, rounded and forms one-third of a sphere.
2. It is covered by an articular hyaline cartilage, which is 
thicker in the center and thinner at the periphery.
Fig. 2.8 Right humerus: A, anterior view; B, posterior view.
Head
Head
Anatomical neck
Anatomical neck
Spiral groove
Shaft of humerus
Medial epicondyle
Medial epicondyle
Trochlea
Lesser tubercle
Greater tubercle
Medial lip
Lateral lip
Bicipital groove
Deltoid tuberosity
Lateral
supracondylar ridge
Olecranon fossa
Coronoid fossa 
Radial fossa
Lateral epicondyle
Surgical neck
Surgical neck
Capitulum
Impression for
teres minor
Impression for
infraspinatus
Impression for
supraspinatus
Deltoid tuberosity
Lateral epicondyle
Medial
supracondylar ridge
Shaft of humerus
Trochlea
--- Page 35 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
Neck
The humerus has three necks:
Anatomical neck
1. It is constriction at the margins of the rounded head.
2. It provides attachment to the capsular ligament of the 
shoulder joint, except—superiorly where the capsule is 
deficient, for the passage of tendon of long head of 
biceps brachii, medially the capsule extends down from 
the anatomical neck to the shaft for about 1–2 cm.
Surgical neck
1. It is short constriction in the upper end of the shaft 
below the greater and lesser tubercles/below the 
epiphyseal line.
2. It is related to axillary nerve and posterior and anterior 
circumflex humeral vessels.
3. It is the most important feature of the proximal end of 
the humerus because it is weaker than the more proximal 
regions of the bone, hence it is one of sites where the 
Head
Head
Supraspinatus
Spiral groove
Medial head of
triceps
Common
flexor origin
Trochlea
Subscapularis
Pectoralis major
Deltoid
Extensor carpi
radialis longus
(ECRL)
Capsular ligament of
elbow joint
Common
extensor origin
Capitulum
Deltoid
Brachioradialis
Latissimus dorsi
Teres major
Teres minor
Infraspinatus
Supraspinatus
Pronator teres
Brachialis
Coracobrachialis
Capsular ligament of
shoulder joint
Capsular ligament of
shoulder joint
Lateral head of triceps
Anconeus
Capsular ligament of 
elbow joint
Fig. 2.9 Right humerus showing attachments of the muscles and ligaments: A, anterior aspect; B, posterior aspect.
--- Page 36 ---
Bones of the Upper Limb
humerus commonly fractures leading to damage of 
associated nerves and vessels.
Morphological neck
1. It is the junction between diaphysis and epiphysis.
2. It is represented by an epiphyseal line in the adult bone.
3. It is a true junction of head with the shaft.
Greater tubercle
1. It is the most lateral part of the proximal end of humerus.
2. Its posterosuperior aspect bears three flattened facet-like 
impressions: upper, middle, and lower, which provide 
attachment to supraspinatus, infraspinatus, and teres 
minor muscles, respectively.
Mnemonic: SIT, (supraspinatus, infraspinatus, teres minor).
Lesser tubercle
1. It is small elevation on the front of upper end of 
humerus, just above the surgical neck.
2. It provides attachment to subscapularis muscle.
Intertubercular Sulcus/Bicipital Groove
1. It is a vertical groove between lesser and greater tubercles.
2. It contains (a) long head of biceps, enclosed in the 
synovial sheath and (b) ascending branch of anterior 
circumflex humeral artery.
3. Three muscles are attached in the region of this groove:
(a) Pectoralis major on the lateral lip of the groove.
(b) Teres major on the medial lip of the groove.
(c) Latissimus dorsi in the floor of the groove.
Mnemonic: Lady between 2 Majors. The ‘L’ of lady stands for 
latissimus dorsi and ‘2M’ stands for pectoralis major and 
teres major.
Shaft
The upper part of the shaft is cylindrical and its lower part is 
triangular in cross section. It has three borders and three 
surfaces.
Borders
Anterior border: It starts from the lateral lip of the 
intertubercular sulcus, and extends down to the anterior 
margin of the deltoid tuberosity and become smooth and 
rounded in the lower half, where it ends in the radial fossa.
Medial border
1. It extends from the medial lip of the intertubercular 
sulcus down to the medial epicondyle. Its lower part is 
sharp and called medial supracondylar ridge. This ridge 
provides attachment to medial intermuscular septum.
2. A rough strip on the middle of this border provides 
insertion to the coracobrachialis muscle.
3. A narrow area above the medial epicondyle provides 
origin to the humeral head of the pronator teres.
Lateral border
1. Its upper part is indistinct while its lower part is 
prominent where it forms the lateral supracondylar 
ridge. Above the lateral supracondylar ridge, it is ill-
defined but traceable to the posterior part of the greater 
tubercle.
2. About its middle, this border is crossed by the radial 
groove from behind.
3. The lower part of this border, lateral supracondylar 
ridge, provides attachment to the lateral intermuscular 
septum.
Surfaces
Anterolateral surface
1. It lies between the anterior and lateral borders.
A little above the middle, this surface presents a 
characteristic V-shaped tuberosity–the deltoid tuberosity 
which provides insertion to the deltoid muscle.
Anteromedial surface
1. It lies between the anterior and medial borders.
2. The upper part of this surface forms the floor of the 
intertubercular sulcus.
3. About its middle and close to the medial border it 
presents a nutrient foramen directed downwards.
Posterior surface
1. It lies between the medial and lateral borders.
2. In the upper one-third of this surface, there is an oblique 
ridge directed downwards and laterally. This ridge 
provides origin to the lateral head of the triceps brachii.
3. Below and medial to the ridge, is the radial/spiral groove, 
which lodges radial nerve and profunda brachii vessels.
4. The entire posterior surface below the spiral groove 
provides origin to the medial head of the triceps brachii.
Lower End
1. It is flattened from before backwards and expanded from 
side to side.
2. The capitulum (rounded convex projection laterally) 
articulates with the head of radius.
3. The trochlea (pulley-shaped projection medially) 
articulates with the trochlear notch of ulna.
4. The ulnar nerve is related to the posterior surface of the 
medial epicondyle.
5. The anterior surface of the medial epicondyle provides 
an area for common flexor origin of the superficial 
flexors of the forearm.
6. The anterolateral part of lateral epicondyle provides an 
area for common extensor origin.
7. The posterior surface of lateral epicondyle gives origin 
to anconeus muscle.
--- Page 38 ---
Bones of the Upper Limb
Table 2.3 Ossification centres of the humerus
Site of appearance
Time of appearance
Time of fusion
Shaft
8th week of IUL
Upper end
• Head
• Greater tubercle
• Lesser tubercle
1st year 
3rd year  Fuse together at 7th year to form a conjoint 
5th year upper epiphysis
Joins with shaft 20th year
Lower end
• Capitulum and lateral flange of trochlea
• Medial part of trochlea
• Lateral epicondyle
• Medial epicondyle
2nd year
10th year  
Fuse together at 14th year to form most
12th year of the lower epiphysis
Joins with shaft 16–17th year
6th year (form small part of the lower epiphysis)
18th year
OSSIFICATION
The humerus is ossified by the following ossification centres:
1. One primary centre for shaft.
2. Three secondary centres for upper end.
3. Four secondary centres for lower end.
The site of appearance, time of appearance, and time of 
fusion of these centres are given in the Table 2.3.
The separate centre for medial epicondyle and its late union 
with the shaft may be mistaken for the fracture of medial 
epicondyle of humerus.
Clinical correlation
RADIUS
The radius is the lateral bone of the forearm and is 
homologous to the medial bone of the leg, the tibia.
PARTS (Fig. 2.13)
The radius is a long bone and consists of three parts: upper 
end, shaft, and lower end.
Upper End
The upper end presents head, neck, and radial tuberosity. 
The head is disc shaped and articulates above with the 
capitulum of humerus. The neck is constricted part below 
the head. The radial tuberosity is just below the medial part 
of the neck.
Shaft
The long shaft extends between the upper and lower ends 
and presents a lateral convexity. It widens rapidly towards 
the distal end and is concave anteriorly in its distal part. Its 
sharpest interosseous border is located on the medial side.
Lower End
The lower end is the widest part and presents five surfaces. 
The lateral surface projects distally as the styloid process. The 
dorsal surface presents a palpable dorsal tubercle (Lister’s 
tubercle), which is limited medially by an oblique groove.
ANATOMICAL POSITION AND SIDE DETERMINATION
The side of radius can be determined by keeping the bone 
vertically in such a way that:
1. The narrow disc-shaped end (head) is directed upwards.
2. The sharpest border (interosseous border) of the shaft 
is kept medially.
3. The styloid process at the lower end is directed laterally 
and prominent tubercle (Lister’s tubercle) at lower end 
faces dorsally.
4. The convexity of shaft faces laterally, and concave 
anterior surface of shaft faces anteriorly.
FEATURES AND ATTACHMENTS (Fig. 2.14)
Upper End
Head
1. It is shaped like a disc and in living it is covered with an 
articular hyaline cartilage.
2. It articulates superiorly with capitulum to form 
humero-radial articulation.
3. The circumference of head is smooth and articulates 
medially with the radial notch of ulna, rest of it is 
encircled by the annular ligament.
Neck
1. It is the constricted part just below the head and is 
embraced by the lower part of annular ligament.
2. The quadrate ligament is attached to the medial side of 
the neck.
--- Page 39 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
Fig. 2.13 Right radius and ulna: A, anterior view; B, posterior view.
Radial tuberosity
1. Biceps tendon is inserted to its rough, posterior part.
2. A small synovial bursa covers its smooth anterior part 
and separates it from the biceps tendon.
Shaft
The shaft has three borders and three surfaces.
Borders
Anterior border
1. It starts below the anterolateral part of radial tuberosity 
and runs downwards and laterally to the styloid process.
2. The upper part of this border is called anterior oblique 
line and lower part forms the sharp lateral border of the 
anterior surface.
Head of radius
Neck of radius
Radial tuberosity
Anterior
oblique line
Rough area for
pronator teres
Radial notch of
ulna
Trochlear
notch
Shaft of
ulna
Shaft of ulna
Shaft of radius
Styloid process of
radius
Head of
ulna
Styloid process of
ulna
Interosseous
borders
Olecranon process
Coronoid 
process
Ulnar
tuberosity
Subcutaneous area
Posterior border
Shaft of radius
Posterior
oblique line
Neck of radius
Head of radius
Olecranon process
Head of ulna
Dorsal tubercle
(Lister’s tubercle)
Styloid process of
ulna
Interosseous
borders
Ulnar notch of
radius
--- Page 40 ---
Bones of the Upper Limb
Fig. 2.14 Radius and ulna of right side showing attachments of the muscles and ligaments: A, anterior aspect; B, posterior 
aspect (FCU = flexor carpi ulnaris, ECU = extensor carpi ulnaris, FDP = flexor digitorum profundus).
Styloid process of
ulna
Flexor
digitorum
profundus
Flexor
pollicis
longus
Pronator
teres
Flexor
digitorum
superficialis
Brachialis
Biceps brachii
Supinator
Flexor digitorum
superficialis
Pronator teres
Flexor pollicis
longus
Brachioradialis
Styloid process of
radius
Pronator
quadratus
Capsule of
wrist joint
Supinator
Triceps
Anconeus
Biceps brachii
Supinator
Abductor pollicis
longus
Extensor pollicis
brevis
Dorsal tubercle of
radius
(Lister’s tubercle)
Styloid process of
radius
Styloid process of
radius
Posterior border
Extensor indicis
Extensor
pollicis longus
Flexor
digitorum
profundus
Common
aponeurosis of
FCU, ECU, and FDP
Capsule of
wrist joint
3. Its anterior oblique line gives origin to radial head of 
flexor digitorum superficialis (FDS).
Posterior border
1. It is well-defined only in its middle third of the shaft.
2. Above it runs upwards and medially to the radial 
tuberosity and form the posterior oblique line.
Medial (interosseous) border
1. It is the sharpest border.
--- Page 41 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
Fig. 2.15 Fracture at distal end of the radius: A, Colles’ 
fracture; B, Smith’s fracture. (Source: Fig. 2.3, Page 53, 
Clinical and Surgical Anatomy, 2e, Vishram Singh. Copyright 
2007, All rights reserved.)
Distal fragment
displaced anteriorly
Radius
Distal fragment
displaced posteriorly
2. It extends above up to radial tuberosity and below its 
lower part forms the posterior margin of the small 
triangular area on the medial side of the lower end of the 
bone.
3. Interosseous membrane is attached to its lower three-
fourth.
Surfaces
Anterior surface
1. It is concave and lies between anterior and interosseous 
borders.
2. Flexor pollicis longus originates from its upper 
two-fourth.
3. Pronator quadratus is inserted on its lower one-fourth.
4. Nutrient foramen is present a little above the middle of 
this surface in its upper part. The nutrient canal is 
directed upwards. Nutrient artery for radius is a branch 
from anterior interosseous artery.
Posterior surface
1. It lies between the interosseous and posterior borders.
2. Abductor pollicis longus (APL) arises from the middle 
one-third of this surface.
3. Extensor pollicis brevis (EPB) arises from lower part of 
this surface.
Lateral surface
1. It lies between anterior and posterior borders.
2. Supinator is inserted on the widened upper one-third of 
this surface.
3. Pronator teres is inserted on the rough area in the most 
convex middle part of this surface.
Lower End
The lower end is the widest part of the bone and has five 
surfaces.
Anterior surface: The anterior surface presents a thick 
ridge, which provides attachment to palmar radio-carpal 
ligament of wrist joint.
Posterior surface: The posterior surface presents the 
dorsal tubercle of Lister lateral to the groove for the tendon of 
extensor pollicis longus. It also presents grooves for other 
extensor tendons.
The groove lateral to the Lister’s tubercle is traversed by 
tendons of extensor carpi radialis longus (ECRL) and extensor 
carpi radialis brevis (ECRB). Through the groove medial to 
groove for extensor pollicis longus passes tendons of extensor 
digitorum and extensor indicis.
Medial surface: The medial surface presents the ulnar 
notch for articulation with the head of ulna. Articular disc of 
inferior radio-ulnar joint is attached to the lower margin of 
ulnar notch.
Lateral surface: The lateral surface projects downward as 
the styloid process and is related to tendons of adductor 
pollicis longus and extensor pollicis brevis. The brachioradialis 
is inserted to the base of styloid process and radial collateral 
ligament of wrist joint is attached to the tip of styloid process.
Inferior surface: The inferior (distal) surface presents a 
lateral triangular area for articulation with the scaphoid and 
a medial quadrangular area for articulation with the lateral 
part of the lunate.
Fracture of radius: The radius is a weight-bearing bone of 
the forearm; hence fractures of radius are more common 
than ulna.
(a) In fracture shaft of radius, with fracture line below the 
insertion of biceps and above the insertion of pronator 
teres the upper fragment is supinated by supinator and 
lower fragment is pronated by the pronator teres.
(b) In fracture at the distal end of radius (Colles’ fracture) 
the distal fragment is displaced backwards and upwards. 
The reverse of Colles’ fracture is called Smith’s fracture 
(Fig. 2.15). 
(c) Fracture of styloid process of radius is termed ‘Chauffeur’s 
fracture’.
Clinical correlation
N.B. The radius is most commonly fractured bone in people 
over 50 years of age. It is often fractured as a result of a fall 
on outstretched hand.
OSSIFICATION
The radius ossifies from the following three centres:
1. One primary centre appears in the mid-shaft during 8th 
week of 1UL.
--- Page 42 ---
Bones of the Upper Limb
2. Two secondary centres, one for each end:
(a) Centre for lower end appears at the age of first year.
(b) Centre for upper end appears during fifth year.
3. The upper epiphysis fuses at the age of 12 years.
4. The lower epiphysis fuses at the age of 20th year.
Madelung deformity: It is a congenital anomaly of radius 
which presents the following clinical features:
• The anterior bowing of distal end of radius, due to an 
abnormal growth of distal epiphysis.
• It occurs between 10 and 14 years of age.
• There is premature disappearance of distal epiphyseal 
line.
• There may be subluxation or dislocation of distal end of 
ulna, due to defective development of distal radial 
epiphysis.
Clinical correlation
ULNA
The ulna is the medial bone of forearm and is homologous 
to the lateral bone of leg—the fibula.
PARTS (Fig. 2.13)
The ulna is a long bone and consists of three parts: upper 
end, lower end, and shaft.
Upper End
The upper end is expanded and hook-like with concavity of 
hook facing forwards. The concavity of upper end (trochlear 
notch) lies between large olecranon process above and the 
small coronoid process below.
Shaft
The long shaft extends between the upper and lower ends. Its 
thickness diminishes progressively from above downwards 
throughout its length. The lateral border (interosseous border) 
is sharp crest-like.
Lower End
The lower end is slightly expanded and has a head and styloid 
process. The styloid process is posteromedial to the head.
N.B. The ulna looks like a pipe wrench with olecranon 
process resembling the upper jaw, the coronoid fossa, the 
lower jaw, and the trochlear notch the mouth of the wrench.
ANATOMICAL POSITION AND SIDE DETERMINATION
The side of ulna can be determined by keeping the bone 
vertically in such a way that:
1. The broad hook-like end is directed upwards.
2. The sharp crest-like interosseous border of shaft is 
directed laterally.
3. The concavity of the hook-like upper end and the 
coronoid process are facing forwards.
FEATURES AND ATTACHMENTS (Fig. 2.14)
Upper End
The upper end has two processes: coronoid and olecranon, 
and two notches: trochlear and radial.
Processes
Olecranon process: It projects upwards from the upper end 
and bends forward at its summit like a beak. It has the fol-
lowing five surfaces:
1. Upper surface
(a) Its rough posterior two-third provides insertion to 
the triceps brachii.
(b) Capsular ligament of elbow joint is attached 
anteriorly near its margins.
(c) A synovial bursa lies between the tendon of triceps 
and capsular ligament.
2. Anterior surface: It is smooth and forms upper part of 
the trochlear notch.
3. Posterior surface
(a) It forms a subcutaneous triangular area.
(b) A synovial bursa (subcutaneous olecranon bursa) 
lies between posterior surface and skin.
4. Medial surface: Its upper part provides attachments to 
three structures: (a) ulnar head of flexor carpi ulnaris 
(origin), (b) posterior, and (c) oblique bands of ulnar 
collateral ligament.
Coronoid process: It is bracket-like projection from the front 
of the upper end of the ulna below the olecranon process. It 
has four surfaces: superior, anterior, medial, and lateral.
1. Superior surface: It is smooth and forms the lower part 
of trochlear notch.
2. Anterior surface: It is triangular in shape.
(a) Its lower corner presents an ulnar tuberosity.
(b) Brachialis muscle is inserted to the whole of the 
anterior surface including ulnar tuberosity.
(c) The medial margin of the anterior surface is sharp 
and has a tubercle at its upper end called sublime 
tubercle. The medial margin provides attachment to 
the following structures from proximal to distal:
 
(i) Anterior band of ulnar collateral ligament.
 
(ii) Oblique band of ulnar collateral ligament.
 
(iii) Humero-ulnar head of flexor digitorum 
superficialis.
--- Page 43 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
(iv) Ulnar head of pronator teres.
 
(v) Ulnar head of flexor pollicis longus.
3. Medial surface: It gives origin to flexor digitorum 
profundus.
4. Lateral surface: The upper part of this surface possesses 
a radial notch for articulation with the head of the 
radius.
(a) The annular ligament is attached to the anterior 
and posterior margins of the radial notch.
(b) The lower part of the lateral surface below radial 
notch has a depressed area called supinator fossa,
which accommodates radial tuberosity during 
supination and pronation.
(c) Supinator fossa is bounded behind by supinator 
crest. Supinator crest and adjoining part of 
supinator fossa gives origin to the supinator muscle.
Notches (articular surfaces)
Trochlear notch
1. It is C-shaped (semilunar) and articulates with the 
trochlea of humerus.
2. It has a non-articular strip at the junction of its 
olecranon and coronoid parts.
3. Its superior, medial, and anterior margins provide 
attachment to capsule of the elbow joint.
Radial notch
It articulates with the head of radius to form the superior 
radio-ulnar joint.
Shaft
It has three borders—lateral, anterior, and posterior; and 
three surfaces—anterior, medial, and posterior.
Borders
Lateral (interosseous) border
1. It is sharpest and is continuous above with the supinator 
crest.
2. It is ill-defined below.
3. Interosseous membrane is attached to this border except 
for its upper part.
Anterior border
1. It extends from the medial side of the ulnar tuberosity to 
the base of styloid process.
2. It is thick and round.
3. It upper three-fourth gives origin to flexor digitorum 
profundus.
Posterior border
1. It starts from the apex of triangular subcutaneous area 
on the back of olecranon process and descends to the 
styloid process.
2. It is subcutaneous throughout, hence can be palpated 
along its entire length.
3. It provides attachment to three muscles by a common 
aponeurosis. The muscles are:
(a) Flexor digitorum profundus.
(b) Flexor carpi ulnaris.
(c) Extensor carpi ulnaris.
Surfaces
Anterior surface
1. It lies between anterior and interosseous borders.
2. The flexor digitorum profundus arises from its upper 
three-fourth.
3. The pronator quadratus arises from an oblique ridge on 
the lower one-fourth of this surface.
4. The nutrient foramen is located a little above the middle 
of this surface and is directed upwards.
Medial surface
1. It lies between the anterior and posterior borders.
2. The flexor digitorum profundus arises from the upper 
two-third of this surface.
Posterior surface
1. It lies between posterior and interosseous borders.
2. It is divided into smaller upper part and large lower part 
by an oblique line, which starts at the junction of upper 
and middle third of posterior border and runs towards 
the posterior edge of radial notch.
3. Area above the oblique line receives insertion of anconeus 
muscle.
4. Area below the oblique line is divided into larger medial 
and smaller lateral parts by a faint vertical line. The 
lateral part provides attachment to three muscles form 
proximal to distal as follows:
(a) Abductor pollicis longus in the upper one-fourth.
(b) Extensor pollicis longus in the middle one-fourth.
(c) Extensor indicis in the next one-fourth.
(d) The distal one-fourth is devoid of any attachments.
Lower End
The lower end consists of head and styloid process.
Head
1. It presents a convex articular surface on its lateral side 
for articulation with the ulnar notch of radius to form 
the inferior radio-ulnar joint.
2. Its inferior surface is smooth and separated from wrist 
joint by an articular disc of inferior radio-ulnar joint.
Styloid process
1. It projects downwards from the posteromedial aspect of 
the head of ulna.
--- Page 44 ---
Bones of the Upper Limb
2. Its tip provides attachment to medial collateral ligament 
of wrist joint.
3. The apex of triangular articular disc is attached to the 
depression between head and base of styloid process.
4. Tendon of extensor carpi ulnaris lies in the groove 
between the back of the head of ulna and styloid process.
N.B. The styloid process is subcutaneous, and may be felt 
in living individual slightly distal to the head when the 
forearm is pronated.
• When the elbow is fully extended, the tip of olecranon 
process and medial and lateral epicondyles of the 
humerus lie in a same horizontal line. When the elbow is 
fully flexed the three bony points form an equilateral 
triangle. In dislocation of elbow this relationship is 
disturbed.
• Ulna stabilizes the forearm by gripping the lower end of 
humerus by its trochlear notch and provides foundation 
for radius to produce supination and pronation at superior 
and inferior radio-ulnar joints.
• The fracture of upper third of shaft of ulna with dislocation 
of radial head at superior radio-ulnar joint is called 
Monteggia fracture dislocations.
• The fracture of lower third of the shaft of radius associated 
with dislocation of inferior radio-ulnar joint is called 
Galeazzi fracture dislocation.
• A fracture of the shaft of ulna due to direct injury when a 
night watchman reflexly raises his forearm to ward off the 
blow of the stick is termed night-stick fracture.
Clinical correlation
OSSIFICATION
The ulna ossifies from the three main centres: one primary 
centre for the shaft and two secondary centres, one each for 
the lower end and the upper end.
Primary centre
It appears in the mid-shaft during eighth week of IUL.
Secondary centres
Upper end
Appearance: 9 years (upper part of trochlear surface and top 
of olecranon process).
Fusion: 
18 years.
Lower end (middle of head)
Appearance: 6 years.
Fusion: 
20 years.
N.B. Distal part of olecranon process is formed as an 
upward extension of the shaft.
CARPAL BONES (Fig. 2.16)
The carpus (G. Corpus = wrist) consists of eight carpal 
bones, which are arranged in two rows: proximal and distal. 
Each row consists of four bones.
The proximal row of carpal bones consists of the following 
bones from lateral to medial side:
1. Scaphoid.
2. Lunate.
3. Triquetral.
4. Pisiform.
The distal row of carpal bones consists of the following 
bones from lateral to medial side:
1. Trapezium.
2. Trapezoid.
3. Capitate.
4. Hamate.
Mnemonic: She Looks Too Pretty. Try To Catch Her.
IDENTIFICATION OF INDIVIDUAL CARPAL BONES
The individual carpal bones can be identified by looking at 
their shape and few other features. These are given in the 
Table 2.4.
N.B. Morphology: Carpus of primitive tetrapods consists of 
three bones in the proximal row, five bones in the distal row 
and an ‘Os centrale’ between the two rows.
The pisiform bone is usually regarded as a sesamoid 
bone developed in the tendon of flexor carpi ulnaris, but 
some authorities regard it as a displaced ‘Os centrale’.
Scaphoid fracture (Fig. 2.17): Fracture of scaphoid is the 
most common fracture of carpus and usually occurs due to 
fall on the outstretched hand. Fracture occurs at the narrow 
waist of the scaphoid. Clinically it presents as tenderness 
in the anatomical box. Blood vessels mostly enter the 
scaphoid through its both ends. But in 10–15% cases, all 
the blood vessels supplying proximal segment enter it 
through its distal pole. In this condition when waist of 
scaphoid is fractured, the proximal segment is deprived of 
blood supply and may undergo avascular necrosis.
Clinical correlation
OSSIFICATION
The carpal bones are cartilaginous at birth. Each carpal 
bone ossifies by one centre and all these centres appear 
after birth.
--- Page 45 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
The centres appear as follows:
Capitate 
Second month
Hamate 
End of third month
Triquetral Third year
Lunate
Scaphoid
Trapezium Fourth year, in females and fifth year in males
Trapezoid
Pisiform 
Twelfth year in males, 9th to 10th year in females
N.B. The capitate is the first bone to ossify and pisiform is 
the last bone to ossify.
The spiral sequence of ossification of the carpal bones 
and approximate ages in years is given in Figure 2.18.
The knowledge of ossification of carpal bones is important 
in determining the bone age of the child.
Clinical correlation
Fig. 2.16 Bones of the hand: A, schematic diagram; B, as seen in radiographs. (Source: Fig. 7.91B, Page 710, Gray's 
Anatomy for Students, Richard L Drake, Wayne Vogl, Adam WM Mitchell. Copyright Elsevier Inc. 2005, All rights reserved.)
Lunate
Triquetral
Pisiform
Hamate
Capitate
Scaphoid
Metacarpals
Phalanges
Trapezium
Trapezoid
Radius
Ulna
First
metacarpal
Proximal phalanx
Middle phalanx
Distal phalanx
Ulna
Radius
Phalanges
Metacarpals
Carpal
bones
Table 2.4 Identification of the carpal bones
Carpal bone
Identifying features
1. Scaphoid
– Boat-shaped
– Has constriction (neck)
– Has tubercle on distal part of its palmar 
surface
2. Lunate
Moon-shaped/crescentic
3. Triquetral
– Pyramidal in shape
– Oval facet on the distal part of its palmar 
surface for articulation with pisiform
4. Pisiform
– Pea-shaped/pea-like
– Oval facet on the proximal part of its dorsal 
surface
5. Trapezium
– Quadrilateral in shape
– Has groove and crest (tubercle) on its 
palmar surface
6. Trapezoid
– Shoe-shaped
7. Capitate
– Largest carpal bone
– Has rounded head on its proximal surface
8. Hamate
– Wedge-shaped
– Hook-like process projects from distal part 
of its palmar surface
--- Page 46 ---
Bones of the Upper Limb
METACARPAL BONES
The metacarpus consists of five metacarpal bones. They are 
conventionally numbered one to five from lateral (radial) to 
medial (ulnar) side.
PARTS
Each metacarpal is a small long bone and consists of three 
parts: (a) head, (b) shaft, and (c) base.
Head
The head is at distal end and rounded.
Shaft
The shaft extends between head and base. It is concave on 
palmar aspect and on sides. The dorsal surface of shaft 
presents a triangular area in its distal part.
Base
The base is proximal end and expanded.
PECULIARITIES OF FIRST METACARPAL
1. The first metacarpal is the shortest and stoutest bone.
2. It is rotated medially through 90° so that its dorsal 
surface faces laterally.
3. Its base possesses concavo-convex (saddle-shaped) 
articular surface for articulation with trapezium.
The head is less convex and broader than other metacarpals.
5. The sesamoid bones glide on radial and ulnar corners of 
head and produces impressions of gliding.
6. Its base dose not articulate with any other metacarpal.
7. It has epiphysis at its proximal end unlike other 
metacarpals, which have epiphysis at their distal end.
OSSIFICATION
Each metacarpal ossifies by two centres: one primary centre 
for the shaft and the one secondary centre for the head.
N.B. The secondary centre of first metacarpal appears in its 
base.
The time of appearance of centres and their fusion is 
given in the box below:
Center
Time of appearance
Fusion
Primary centre for shaft
9th week of IUL
Secondary centre for head of 
second, third, fourth, and fifth 
metacarpal
2 years
16 years
Secondary centre for base for 
first metacarpal
2 years
18 years
Fig. 2.17 Fracture of scaphoid bone (arrow): A, in radiograph 
of the hand (AP view); B, CT scan of the wrist. (Source: Fig. 
5.6, Page 131, Integrated Anatomy, David JA Heylings, Roy 
AJ Spence, Barry E Kelly. Copyright Elsevier Limited 2007, 
All rights reserved.)
Ulna
Lunate
Triquetral
Hamate
Lunate
Capitate
Capitate
Trapezium
Trapezium
Scaphoid
fracture
Scaphoid
fracture
Radius
Trapezoid
Fig. 2.18 Ossification of the carpal bones (Scap = scaphoid, 
Lun = lunate, Tri = triquetral, Tr = trapezium, Tz = trapezoid, 
Cap = capitate, Ham = hamate).
Scap
Tri (3rd year)
Pisiform
2nd month
3rd month
4th to 5th year
--- Page 47 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
Shaft
1. The shaft tapers towards the head.
2. The dorsal surface is convex from side to side.
3. The palmar surface is flat from side to side but gently 
concave in the long axis.
Head
1. The heads of proximal and middle phalanges are pulley 
shaped.
2. The heads of distal phalanges is non-articular and has 
rough horseshoe-shaped tuberosity.
OSSIFICATION
Each phalanx ossifies by the two centres: one primary centre 
for the shaft and one secondary centre for the base.
Their time of appearance is as follows:
Primary centres
For proximal phalanx: 10th week of IUL.
For middle phalanx: 12th week of IUL.
For distal phalanx: 8th week of IUL.
Secondary centres
Appearance: 2 years.
Fusion: 16 years.
An undisplaced fracture of phalanx can be treated 
satisfactorily by strapping the fractured finger with the 
neighboring finger.
Clinical correlation
N.B. The sesamoid bones in region of hand are found on 
the following sites:
(a) Sesamoid bone in the tendon of flexor carpi ulnaris 
(pisiform).
(b) Two sesamoid bones on the palmar surface of the head 
of first metacarpal.
(c) Sesamoid bone in the capsule of interphalangeal (IP) 
joint of thumb (in 75% cases).
(d) Sesamoid bone on the ulnar side of capsule of MCP 
joint of little finger (in 75% cases).
The sesamoid bones related to head of the first 
metacarpal bones are generally noticed in X-ray of hand 
(Fig. 2.15).
Fig. 2.19 An X-ray of hand showing boxer’s fracture—neck 
of 5th metacarpal (arrow). (Source: Fig. 5.8, Page 131, 
Integrated Anatomy, David JA Heylings, Roy AJ Spence, 
Barry E Kelly. Copyright Elsevier Limited 2007, All rights 
reserved.)
• Bennet’s fracture: It is an oblique fracture of the base of 
1st metacarpal. It is intra-articular and may be associated 
with subluxation or dislocation of metacarpal.
• Boxer’s fracture (Fig. 2.19): It is fracture of neck of 
metacarpal, and most commonly involves neck of 5th 
metacarpal.
Clinical correlation
PHALANGES
There are 14 phalanges in each hand: two in thumb and three 
in each finger.
PARTS AND FEATURES
Each phalanx is a short long bone and has three parts: 
(a) base (proximal end), (b) head (distal end), and (c) shaft 
(extending between the two ends).
Base
1. The bases of proximal phalanges have concave oval facet 
for articulation with the heads of metacarpals.
2. The bases of middle and distal phalanges possess pulley-
shaped articular surfaces.
--- Page 49 ---
Pectoral Region
CHAPTER
The pectoral region is the anterior aspect of the thorax 
(chest). The important structures are present in this region 
are:
1. Muscles that connect the upper limb with the 
anterolateral chest wall.
Breasts (mammary glands) which secrete milk (in female).
SURFACE LANDMARKS
The following landmarks can be felt on the surface of the 
body in this region (Fig. 3.1):
1. Clavicle: Being subcutaneous in location, it is palpable 
along its whole length at the junction of root of the neck 
and front of the chest.
2. Suprasternal notch (jugular notch): It is a palpable 
notch at the upper border of manubrium sterni between 
the medial ends of two clavicles.
3. Sternal angle (angle of Louis): It is felt as a transverse 
ridge about 5 cm below the suprasternal notch. It marks 
the junction of manubrium and the body of the sternum. 
On either side, the costal cartilage of 2nd rib articulates 
with the sternum at this level. The sternal angle thus 
serves as a useful landmark to identify the 2nd rib and 
subsequently helps in counting down the other ribs.
4. Infraclavicular fossa: It is a triangular depression below 
the junction of middle and lateral third of the clavicle.
5. Coracoid process: The tip of coracoid process is felt in 
the infraclavicular fossa, 2.5 cm below the clavicle.
6. Nipple: It is the most important surface feature of the 
pectoral region. Its position varies considerably in the 
female but in the male, it usually lies in the 4th intercostal 
space just medial to the midclavicular line.
LINES OF ORIENTATION
The following lines are often used to describe the surface 
features on the anterior chest wall:
1. Midsternal line: It runs vertically downwards in the 
median plane on the front of the sternum.
2. Midclavicular line: It runs vertically downwards from 
the midpoint of the clavicle to the midinguinal point.
3. Anterior axillary line: It runs vertically downwards from 
the anterior axillary fold.
4. Midaxillary line: It runs vertically downwards from a 
point located midway between the anterior and posterior 
axillary folds.
5. Posterior axillary line: It runs vertically downwards 
from the posterior axillary fold.
CUTANEOUS INNERVATION
The skin of the pectoral region is supplied by the following 
cutaneous nerves (Fig. 3.2):
Clavicle
Infraclavicular fossa
Coracoid
process
Acromion
Lesser
tubercle of
humerus
Nipple
Greater
tubercle of
humerus
Suprasternal
notch
Manubrium
Sternal angle
Second
costal 
cartilage
Body of 
sternum
Xiphoid 
process
Fig. 3.1 Skeletal framework and surface landmarks of the 
pectoral region.
--- Page 50 ---
Pectoral Region
1. The skin above the horizontal line drawn at the level of 
sternal angle is supplied by supraclavicular nerves (C3 
and C4).
2. The skin below this horizontal line is supplied by 
anterior and lateral cutaneous branches of the 2nd–6th 
intercostal nerves (T2–T6).
N.B. The area supplied by C4 spinal segment directly meets 
the area supplied by T2 spinal segment. This is because the 
nerves derived from C5–T1 spinal segments form brachial 
plexus to supply the upper limb (Fig. 3.3).
MUSCLES
The muscles of the pectoral region are:
1. Pectoralis major.
2. Pectoralis minor.
3. Subclavius.
4. Serratus anterior.*
PECTORALIS MAJOR (Figs 3.4 and 3.5)
It is the largest muscle of the pectoral region.
Origin
Pectoralis major muscle is thin fan shaped and arises by two 
heads, viz.
1. Small clavicular head.
2. Large sternocostal head.
Clavicular head—arises from the medial half of the anterior 
aspect of the clavicle.
Sternocostal head—arises from the (a) lateral half of 
the anterior surface of the sternum, up to 6th costal 
cartilage, (b) medial parts of 2nd–6th costal cartilages, 
and (c) aponeurosis of the external oblique muscle of the 
abdomen.
Clavicle
Supraclavicular
nerves
Intercostobrachial
nerve
Lateral cutaneous
nerves (T3–T6)
Sternal
angle
Anterior
cutaneous
nerves (T2–T6)
Fig. 3.2 Cutaneous nerves of the pectoral region.
Horizontal line
passing through
sternal angle
Costal margin
Fig. 3.3 Dermatomes in the pectoral region.
Insertion of
pectoralis 
minor
Insertion of
pectoralis 
major
Origin of 
pectoralis 
minor
Origin of 
sternocostal
head of 
pectoralis 
major
Origin of clavicular head of
pectoralis major
Fig. 3.4 Bony attachments of the pectoralis major and 
minor muscles.
*The serratus anterior is a thin muscular sheet overlying the lateral 
aspect of chest wall, hence, it is not a muscle of pectoral region but 
grouped with pectoral muscles for convenience of study and surgical 
significance.
--- Page 51 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
Insertion
Pectoralis major is inserted by a U-shaped (bilaminar) ten-
don on to the lateral lip of the bicipital groove. The anterior 
lamina of the tendon is formed by the clavicular fibres, while 
posterior lamina is formed by sternocostal fibres. The two 
laminae are continuous with each other inferiorly.
The lower sternocostal and abdominal fibres in their 
course to insertion are twisted in such a way that fibres, 
which are lowest are inserted highest.
This twisting of fibres forms the rounded axillary fold.
Nerve Supply
Nerve supply is by lateral (C5 to C7) and medial pectoral (C8 
and T1) nerves.
N.B.
• The pectoralis major and pectoralis minor muscles are 
the only muscles of the upper limb, which are supplied 
by all five spinal segments that form the brachial 
plexus.
• Occasionally a vertical sheet of muscle fibres extending 
from root of the neck to the upper part of the abdomen 
passes superficial to the medial part of pectoralis major. 
It is termed rectus sternalis/sternalis muscle.
Actions
The clavicular head flexes the arm, whereas sternocostal head 
adducts and medially rotates the arm.
 
 Clinical testing: On lifting a heavy rod, the clavicular head 
becomes prominent and when one attempts to depress 
the rod, the sternocostal head becomes prominent.
• Congenital anomaly of pectoralis major: Occasionally, 
a part of the pectoralis major, usually the sternocostal 
part, is absent at birth. This causes weakness in adduction 
and medial rotation of the arm.
Clinical correlation
PECTORALIS MINOR (Figs 3.4 and 3.6)
It is the small triangular muscle that lies deep to the pectoralis 
major muscle.
Origin
It arises from 3rd, 4th, and 5th ribs, near their costal 
cartilages.
Insertion
It is inserted by a short thick tendon into the medial border 
and upper surface of the coracoid process of the scapula.
Nerve Supply
Nerve supply is by medial and lateral pectoral nerves.
2. Anterior surface of 
 the sternum
Clavicular head
Sternocostal head
PECTORALIS MAJOR 
3. Medial parts of
 2nd–6th
 costal cartilages
4. Aponeurosis of
 external oblique
 Origin
1. Anterior surface of
 the medial half of
 clavicle
Insertion
Lateral lip of
intertubercular sulcus
Fig. 3.5 Origin and insertion of the pectoralis major muscle.
Fig. 3.6 Origin and insertion of the pectoralis minor muscle.
Origin
From 3rd, 4th, and
5th ribs near their
costal cartilages
Insertion
Medial border and
upper surface of the
coracoid process
PECTORALIS
MINOR
--- Page 53 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
Origin
It arises by a series of 8 digitations from upper eight ribs. The 
first digitation arises from the 1st and 2nd ribs, whereas all 
other digitations arise from their corresponding ribs.
Insertion
It is inserted into the costal surface of the scapula along its 
medial border. (The first 2 digitations are inserted into the 
superior angle, next 2 digitations into the medial border and 
the lower 4 or 5 digitations into the inferior angle of the 
scapula.)
Nerve Supply
It is by long thoracic nerve/nerve to serratus anterior (C5, 
C6, and C7).
Actions
1. It is a powerful protractor of the scapula, i.e., it pulls the 
scapula forward around the chest wall for pushing and 
punching movements as required during boxing. Hence, 
serratus anterior is also called boxer’s muscle.
2. It keeps the medial/vertebral border of scapula in firm 
contact with the chest wall.
3. Its lower 4 or 5 digitations along with lower part of the 
trapezius rotate the scapula laterally and upwards during 
overhead abduction of the arm.
Paralysis of serratus anterior: The paralysis of serratus 
anterior muscle following an injury to long thoracic nerve by 
stab injury or during removal of the breast tumor leads to the 
following effects:
(a) Protraction of scapula is weakened.
(b) Inferior angle and medial border of scapula become 
unduly prominent particularly when patient pushes his 
hands against the wall, producing a clinical condition 
called winging of the scapula (Fig. 3.9).
Clinical correlation
FASCIAE
PECTORAL FASCIA
It is the deep fascia covering the anterior aspect of the 
pectoralis major muscle. It is thin and anchored firmly to the 
muscle by numerous fasciculi.
Extent
1. Superiorly, it is attached to the clavicle.
2. Inferiorly, it is continuous with the fascia of anterior 
abdominal wall.
3. Superolaterally, it passes over the deltopectoral groove 
to become continuous with the fascia covering the 
deltoid muscle.
4. Inferolaterally, it curves round the inferolateral border 
of the pectoralis major to become continuous with the 
axillary fascia. The axillary fascia is a dense fibrous sheet 
that extends across the base of the axilla.
CLAVIPECTORAL FASCIA (Fig. 3.10)
The clavipectoral fascia is a strong fascial sheet deep to the 
clavicular head of the pectoralis major muscle, filling the 
space between the clavicle and the pectoralis minor muscle.
Extent
1. Vertically, it extends from clavicle above to the axillary 
fascia below. Its upper part splits into two laminae to 
enclose the subclavius muscle. The posterior lamina 
becomes continuous with the investing layer of deep 
cervical fascia and gets fused with the axillary sheath. 
The anterior lamina gets attached to the clavicle.
Its lower part splits to enclose the pectoralis minor 
muscle. Below this muscle it extends downwards as the 
suspensory ligament of axilla, which is attached to the 
dome of the axillary fascia. The suspensory ligament 
keeps the dome of axillary fascia pulled up, thus 
maintaining the concavity of the axilla.
Medially, clavipectoral fascia is attached to the first rib 
and costoclavicular ligament and blends with external 
intercostal membrane of the upper two intercostal spaces.
Fig. 3.9 The winging of right scapula. The vertebral border 
and inferior angle of scapula protrude posteriorly, when the 
patient is asked to press his hands against the wall.
--- Page 54 ---
Pectoral Region
3. Laterally, it is attached to the coracoid process and 
blends with the coracoclavicular ligament. The thick 
upper part of the fascia extending from first rib near 
costochondral junction to the coracoid process is called 
costocoracoid ligament.
N.B. The clavipectoral fascia encloses two muscles—
subclavius and pectoralis minor.
Structures Piercing the Clavipectoral Fascia
These are as follows (Fig. 3.11):
1. Lateral pectoral nerve.
2. Thoraco-acromial artery.
3. Lymphatics from the breast to the apical group of 
axillary group of lymph nodes.
4. Cephalic vein. The first two structures pass outwards, 
whereas the lower two structures pass inwards.
BREAST (MAMMARY GLAND)
The mammary gland is a modified sweat gland present in the 
superficial fascia of the pectoral region. The mammary gland 
is found in both sexes. However, it remains rudimentary in 
male but becomes well-developed in female at puberty. On 
rare occasions the breasts of male become enlarged, this 
condition is called gynecomastia. In female, it forms an 
accessory sex organ of female reproductive system and 
provides milk to the newborn baby. The anatomy of breast is 
of great surgical importance, and therefore, needs to be 
studied in detail.
LOCATION (Figs 3.12 and 3.13)
The breast is located in the superficial fascia of the pectoral 
region. A small extension from its superolateral part 
(axillary tail of Spence) however pierces the deep fascia 
and extends into the axilla. The aperture in the deep fascia 
through which axillary tail passes into the axilla is called 
foramen of Langer. The axillary tail is the site of high 
percentage of breast tumor.
SHAPE AND EXTENT (Figs 3.12 and 3.13)
Shape
Hemispherical bulge.
Extent
1. Vertically, it extends from 2nd rib to 6th rib.
2. Horizontally, it extends from lateral border of the 
sternum to the midaxillary line.
Axillary
fascia
Anterior
axillary fold
Pectoralis major
Pectoralis minor
Pectoral fascia
Subclavius muscle
Clavipectoral
fascia
Investing layer of
deep cervical
fascia
Clavicle
First rib
Coracoclavicular
ligament 
Coracoid process
Coracobrachialis
Short head of
biceps brachii
Costoclavicular
ligament
Pectoralis minor
Clavipectoral 
fascia
Subclavius
Fig. 3.10 Clavipectoral fascia: A, as seen in sagittal section 
of anterior axillary wall; B, as seen from front.
Fig. 3.11 Structures piercing the clavipectoral fascia. 
(Source: Fig. 1.9, Page 11, Selective Anatomy Prep Manual 
for Undergraduates, Vol. I, Vishram Singh. Copyright Elsevier 
2014, All rights reserved.)
Structures piercing clavipectoral fascia
1. Thoraco-acromial artery
2. Cephalic vein
3. Lateral pectoral nerve
4. Lymphatics
Axillary vein
Clavipectoral
fascia
Axillary artery
Lateral cord of 
brachial plexus
--- Page 56 ---
Pectoral Region
Skin: It is the covering for the breast and presents the 
following features:
1. Nipple: It is a conical projection below the center of the 
breast, usually at the level of the 4th intercostal space. It 
contains smooth muscle fibres, which can make the 
nipple stiff and erect or flatten it. Being richly innervated 
by sensory nerve endings, the nipple is the most sensitive 
part of the breast to tactile stimulation and become erect 
during sexual arousal.
2. Areola: It is the circular area of pigmented skin 
surrounding the base of the nipple. It contains large 
number of modified sebaceous glands, particularly at its 
outer margin. They produce oily secretion, which 
lubricates the nipple and areola, and thus prevents them 
from drying and cracking. The color of the areola and 
nipple varies with the complexion of the woman. During 
pregnancy the areola becomes darker and enlarged.
N.B. The sebaceous glands in the areola are enlarged 
during pregnancy and appear as small nodular elevations 
called Montgomery’s tubercles.
Stroma: The stroma of breast consists of connective tissue 
and fat. It forms the supporting framework of the breast.
The connective tissue condenses to form fibrous strands/ 
septa, called suspensory ligaments of Cooper.
The suspensory ligaments of Cooper are arranged in a 
radial fashion. They connect the dermis of the overlying skin 
to the ducts of the breast and pectoral fascia. The ligaments 
of the Cooper maintain the protuberance of the breast. Their 
atrophy due to ageing makes the breast pendulous in old age.
The fat forms the most of the bulk of the breast. It is 
distributed all over the breast except beneath the areola and 
the nipple.
Parenchyma: The parenchyma/glandular tissue of the breast 
secrete milk to feed the newborn baby. It consists of about 
15–20 lobes arranged in a radial fashion like the spokes of a 
wheel and converge towards the nipple. Each lobe is divided 
Fig. 3.16 Structure of the breast: A, parenchyma (lobes of the breast); B, stroma of the breast (suspensory ligaments of 
Cooper and fat).
Clavicle
Pectoralis major
Lobes of the breast 
Lactiferous sinus
Pectoral fascia
Clavicle
Lobes of the breast 
Pectoralis major
Ligaments of
Cooper
Pectoral fascia
Lactiferous duct
Fig. 3.17 Structure of the lobe of the mammary gland.
Areola
Nipple
Lobules
Lactiferous sinus
Lactiferous
duct
Acini
--- Page 58 ---
Pectoral Region
Deltopectoral node
Supraclavicular nodes
Internal
mammary
nodes
Apical group
Anterior group
Posterior group
Posterior
intercostal nodes
Central group
Lateral group
Axillary lymph nodes
Fig. 3.19 Lymph nodes draining the breast.
Fig. 3.20 Subareolar plexus of Sappey.
Nipple
Subareolar plexus of 
Sappey
Anterior
axillary nodes
Fig. 3.21 Mode of lymphatic drainage of the breast (UL = upper lateral quadrant, LL = lower lateral quadrant, UM = upper 
medial quadrant, LM = lower medial quadrant).
Deltopectoral
lymph node
Apical group of
axillary lymph nodes
Central
Lateral
Breast
Anterior
Groups of axillary
lymph nodes
Posterior
Posterior intercostal
lymph nodes
Internal mammary
lymph nodes
Subperitoneal
lymph plexus
Ovary
Krukenberg’s tumor
--- Page 59 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
Fig. 3.22 Direct pathway of deep lymphatics of the breast 
through pectoralis major and clavipectoral fascia to the 
apical group of axillary nodes.
Axillary vein
Axillary
artery
Apical group of
axillary nodes
Clavipectoral fascia
Lymphatics Draining the Breast
The lymphatics draining the breast are divided into two 
groups: (a) superficial and (b) deep.
Superficial lymphatics drain the skin of the breast except 
that of nipple and areola.
Deep lymphatics drain the parenchyma of the breast, and 
skin of the nipple and areola. A plexus of lymph vessels deep 
to the areola is called subareolar plexus of Sappey (Fig. 3.20). 
The subareolar plexus and most of the lymph from the breast 
drain into the anterior group of axillary lymph nodes.
The superficial lymphatics of the breast of one side 
communicate with those of the opposite side. Consequently 
the unilateral malignancy may become bilateral.
The lymphatic drainage from the breast occurs as follows 
(Fig. 3.21):
1. The lymph from lateral quadrants of the breast is 
drained into anterior axillary or pectoral group of lymph 
nodes. These lymph nodes are situated deep to the lower 
border of pectoralis minor.
The lymph from medial quadrants is drained into 
internal mammary lymph nodes situated along the 
internal mammary artery. Some lymphatics may go to 
the internal mammary lymph nodes of the opposite side.
3. A few lymph vessels from the lower lateral quadrant of 
the breast follow the posterior intercostal arteries and 
drain into posterior intercostal nodes located along the 
course of these arteries.
4. The few lymph vessels from the lower medial quadrant 
of the breast pierce the anterior abdominal wall and 
communicate with subdiaphragmatic and subperitoneal 
lymph plexuses.
5. The lymph vessels from the deep surface of the breast 
pierce pectoralis major and clavipectoral fascia to drain 
into the apical group of axillary lymph nodes (Fig. 3.22).
N.B. About 75% of the lymph from the breast is drained 
into axillary nodes, 20% into internal mammary lymph 
nodes, and 5% into the posterior intercostal lymph nodes.
Among the axillary lymph nodes, most of the lymph drains 
into the anterior axillary nodes and the remaining into 
posterior and apical groups. The lymph from anterior and 
posterior groups first goes to the central and lateral groups, 
and then through them into the supraclavicular lymph nodes.
Breast cancer (carcinoma of the breast): It is one of the 
most common cancers in the females. It arises from the 
epithelial cells of the lactiferous ducts. In about 60% cases, 
it occurs in the upper lateral quadrant and commonly affects 
females between 40–60 years of age. Clinically it presents 
(a) Presence of a painless hard lump.
(b) Breast becomes fixed and immobile, due to infiltration 
of suspensory ligaments.
(c) Retraction of skin, due to infiltration of suspensory 
ligaments.
(d) Retraction of nipple due to infiltration and fibrosis of 
lactiferous ducts.
(e) peau d’orange’ appearance of the skin (i.e., skin giving 
rise to appearance like that of the skin of the orange) 
due to obstruction of superficial lymphatics.
• The knowledge of lymphatic drainage of the breast is of 
great clinical importance due to high percentage of 
occurrence of cancer in the breast and its subsequent 
dissemination of cancer cells (metastasis) along the 
lymph vessels to the regional lymph nodes.
In classical operation of radical mastectomy, whole of 
breast is removed along with axillary lymph nodes, and 
pectoralis major and minor muscles.
• Some lymph vessels from the inferomedial quadrant of 
the breast communicate with the subperitoneal lymph 
plexus and carry cancer cells to it. From here cancer 
cells migrate transcoelomically and deposit on the ovary 
producing 
secondary 
tumor 
ovary 
called 
Krukenberg’s tumor.
• The cancer of breast is a serious and often a fatal disease 
in women. The mammography (Fig. 3.23) and regular 
self-examination of the breast help in early detection of 
the breast cancer and effective treatment.
The six steps of breast self-examination are as follows 
(Fig. 3.24):
1. Stand in front of a long mirror and inspect both breasts 
for any discharge from the nipples, puckering, or dimpling 
of the skin. Now look for any change in shape or contour 
of the breasts.
Clinical correlation
--- Page 61 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
Fig. 3.25 Development of the breast. Note the extent of 
milk line and possible positions of accessory nipples.
depressed, and gives off 15–20 solid cords, which grow in the 
underlying mesenchyme and proliferate from lobes of the 
gland. At birth, the depressed ectodermal thickening is raised 
to form the nipple. The stroma of breast develops from 
surrounding mesoderm.
Developmental anomalies of the breast: The following 
developmental anomalies of the breasts are encountered 
during clinical practice:
• Polythelia/supernumerary nipples, which appear along 
the milk ridge and is often mistaken for moles.
• Retracted nipple/inserted nipple, which occurs if nipple 
fails to develop from ectodermal pit. In this condition 
suckling of infant cannot take place and nipple is prone to 
infection.
• Polymastia, the development more than one breast along 
the milk line.
• Gynecomastia, the development of breast in male, 
mainly at puberty. Usually it is bilateral and thought to 
occur due to hormonal imbalance.
Clinical correlation
Axilla
Fully
developed
breast
Milk line
(line of Schultz)
Mammary
buds
Groin
Accessory
nipples
--- Page 63 ---
Axilla (Armpit)
CHAPTER
The axilla or armpit is a fat-filled pyramid-shaped space, 
between the upper part of the arm and the side of the chest 
wall (Fig. 4.1). It contains the brachial plexus, axillary 
vessels, and lymph nodes. It also acts as a funnel shaped 
tunnel for neurovascular structures to pass from the root of 
the neck to the upper limb and vice versa. Groups of lymph 
nodes within it drain the upper limb and the breast. The 
study of axilla is clinically important because axillary lymph 
nodes are often enlarged and hence routinely palpated 
during physical examination of the patient. Abscess in this 
region is also common.
BOUNDARIES (Figs 4.2–4.4)
The axilla resembles a truncated four-sided pyramid and 
presents an apex, a base and four walls (anterior, posterior, 
medial, and lateral) (Fig. 4.2).
 
 Apex/cervico-axillary canal: It is a passageway between 
the neck and axilla. It is directed upwards and medially 
into the root of the neck and corresponds to the triangu-
lar space bounded in front by the clavicle, behind by the 
upper border of the scapula and medially by the outer 
border of the first rib (Fig. 4.3). The axillary artery and 
brachial plexus enter the axilla from neck through this 
gap, hence it is also termed cervico-axillary canal. The 
Fig. 4.1 Location of the axilla.
Posterior axillary fold
Anterior axillary fold
Axilla (armpit)
Fig. 4.2 Boundaries of the axilla (Note anterior wall is not 
seen).
Outer border of
first rib
Clavicle
Upper border of
scapula
Cervico-axillary canal
Fig. 4.3 Boundaries of the cervico-axillary canal (apex of 
the axilla).
Medial wall
Apex
Lateral wall
Posterior wall
Base
--- Page 65 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
Fig. 4.5 Course and branches of the axillary artery.
Thoraco-acromial artery
Circumflex
scapular artery
Subscapular artery
Teres major
Pectoralis minor
Subclavian artery
Coracoid process
Axillary artery
Long (lateral)
thoracic artery
Posterior circumflex
humeral artery
Superior (supreme)
thoracic artery
Brachial artery
Anterior circumflex
humeral artery
Table 4.1 Relations of the axillary artery
Part
Anterior
Posterior
Medial
Lateral
First part
• Pectoralis major 
(clavicular part)
• Loop of communication 
between lateral and 
medial pectoral nerves
• Medial cord of brachial plexus
• Long thoracic nerve
• Serratus anterior (first digitation)
Axillary vein
Lateral and posterior 
cords of brachial 
plexus
Second part
Pectoralis minor
• Posterior cord of brachial plexus
• Subscapularis
• Medial cord of 
brachial plexus
• Axillary vein
Lateral cord of brachial 
plexus
Third part
Medial root of median nerve
• Radial nerve
• Axillary nerve
• Subscapularis (in the upper part)
• Teres major (in the lower part)
• Axillary vein
• Medial cutaneous 
nerve of forearm
• Ulnar nerve
Musculocutaneous 
nerve
B. From second part
1. Thoraco-acromial artery (acromiothoracic artery),
emerges at the upper border of pectoralis minor, 
pierces clavipectoral fascia and soon breaks up into 
four branches: (a) pectoral branch, (b) deltoid branch, 
(c) acromial branch, and (d) clavicular branch. These 
branches radiate at right angle to each other. The 
pectoral branch supplies pectoral muscles, deltoid 
branch, ends by joining anastomosis over the 
acromion, clavicular branch supplied sternoclavicular 
joint.
2. Lateral thoracic artery, emerges at and runs along the 
inferior border of pectoralis minor, supplying the 
branches to pectoralis major and minor and serratus 
anterior muscles. In the females, the lateral thoracic 
artery is large and provides important supply to the 
breast through its lateral mammary branches.
C. From third part
1. Subscapular artery, the largest branch of axillary artery, 
runs along the lower border of the subscapularis and 
ends near the inferior angle of the scapula. It gives a
--- Page 66 ---
Axilla (Armpit)
Fig. 4.6 Relations of the axillary artery: A, first part; B, second part; C, third part.
Second part of
axillary artery
Pectoralis major
Axillary vein
Medial cord
Posterior cord
Lateral cord
Pectoralis minor
Third part of
axillary artery
Axillary nerve
Radial nerve
Medial root of
median nerve
Medial cutaneous
nerve of forearm 
Medial cutaneous
nerve of arm
Axillary vein
Musculocutaneous nerve
Ulnar nerve
Teres major
Subscapularis
Lateral
pectoral nerve
Lateral cord
Posterior cord
First part of
axillary artery
Medial pectoral
nerve
Pectoralis major
Loop of communication between
medial and lateral pectoral nerves
Axillary vein
Medial cord
Long thoracic
nerve
Serratus anterior
(first digitation)
Subscapularis
large branch, the circumflex scapular artery, which 
passes through upper triangular intermuscular space, 
winds round the lateral border of scapula to enter 
infraspinous fossa. In addition, it gives numerous small 
branches.
2. Anterior circumflex humeral artery, a small branch, 
passes in front of surgical neck of humerus and 
anastomoses with the posterior circumflex humeral 
artery to form an arterial circle around the surgical neck 
of humerus. It gives an ascending branch, which runs 
upwards into the intertubercular sulcus of humerus to 
supply the head of humerus and shoulder joint.
3. Posterior circumflex humeral artery, larger than the 
anterior circumflex humeral artery, passes backwards, 
along with axillary nerve through the quadrangular 
intermuscular space, crosses the posterior aspect of 
surgical neck of humerus to anastomose with the 
anterior circumflex humeral artery. It supplies the 
deltoid muscle and shoulder joint.
Arterial Anastomosis Around Scapula 
(Scapular Anastomosis; Fig. 4.7)
The arterial anastomosis around scapula is principally 
formed between the branches of the first part of the 
subclavian and the third part of the axillary arteries. 
The scapular anastomosis takes place at two sites: around 
the body of scapula and over the acromion process of the 
scapula.
1. Around the body of scapula: It occurs between the
(a) suprascapular artery, a branch of the thyrocervical 
trunk from the first part of the subclavian artery,
(b) circumflex scapular artery, a branch of the 
subscapular artery from the third part of the axillary 
artery, and
(c) deep branch of the transverse cervical artery, a branch 
of the thyrocervical trunk.
2. Over the acromion process: It occurs between the
(a) acromial branch of the thoraco-acromial artery,
(b) acromial branch of the suprascapular artery, and
(c) acromial branch of the posterior circumflex humeral 
artery.
Collateral circulation through scapular anastomosis: If 
the subclavian and axillary arteries are blocked anywhere 
between 1st part of subclavian artery and 3rd part of axillary 
artery, the scapular anastomosis serves as a potential 
pathway (collateral circulation) between the first part of the 
subclavian artery and the third part of the axillary artery, to 
ensure the adequate circulation to the upper limb.
Clinical correlation
--- Page 68 ---
Axilla (Armpit)
• Palpation of axillary lymph nodes: The palpation of 
axillary lymph nodes is part of clinical examination of the 
breast due to their involvement in cancer breast.
• Axillary abscess: An abscess in the axilla arises from 
infection and suppuration of the axillary lymph nodes. The 
abscess may grow to a considerable size before the 
patient feels pain. The pus of axillary abscess may track 
into the neck or into the arm if it enters the axillary sheath, 
or between the pectoral muscles if it breaks through the 
clavipectoral fascia. The axillary abscess is drained by 
giving an incision in the floor of axilla, for it being the most 
dependant part, midway between the anterior and 
posterior axillary folds nearer to the medial wall to avoid 
injury to the main vessels running along the anterior, 
posterior, and lateral walls of the axilla.
Clinical correlation
BRACHIAL PLEXUS
The brachial plexus is the plexus of nerves formed by the 
anterior (ventral) rami of lower four cervical and the first 
thoracic (i.e., C5, C6, C7, C8, and T1) spinal nerves with 
little contribution from C4 to T2 spinal nerves.
N.B. If the contribution from C4 is large and that from T2 is 
absent, it is called prefixed brachial plexus. On the other 
hand, if contribution from T2 is large and that from C4 is 
absent, it is termed postfixed brachial plexus.
Components (Fig. 4.9)
The brachial plexus consists of four components: (a) roots, 
(b) trunks, (c) divisions, and (d) cords. The roots and trunks 
are located in the neck, divisions behind the clavicle and the 
cords in the axilla.
AXILLARY LYMPH NODES (Fig. 4.8)
The axillary lymph nodes are scattered in the fibrofatty tissue 
of the axilla. Their number varies between 20 and 30. They 
are divided into the following five groups:
1. Anterior or pectoral group: They lie along the lateral 
thoracic vein at the lower border of the pectoralis minor. 
They receive the lymph from the upper half of the trunk 
anteriorly and from the major part of the breast. The 
axillary tail of Spence is in actual contact with these lymph 
nodes. Therefore, cancer involving axillary tail of the 
breast may be misdiagnosed as an enlarged lymph node.
2. Posterior or subscapular group: They lie on the posterior 
axillary fold along the subscapular vein. They receive the 
lymph from the upper half of the trunk posteriorly, and 
from the axillary tail of the breast.
3. Lateral group: They lie along the upper part of the 
humerus in relation to the axillary vein. They drain the 
lymph from the upper limb.
4. Central group: They are situated in the upper part of the 
axilla. They receive the lymph from the other groups and 
drain into the apical group (vide infra). The 
intercostobrachial nerve passes amongst these nodes. 
Therefore, enlargement of these nodes such as in cancer 
may compress this nerve, causing pain in the area of 
distribution of this nerve, i.e., along the inner border of 
the arm.
5. Apical or infraclavicular group: They are situated deep 
to the clavipectoral fascia at the apex of the axilla along 
the axillary vein. They are of great clinical importance, 
because they receive lymph directly from the upper part 
of the breast and indirectly from the rest of the breast 
through central group of nodes. They drain into 
subclavian lymph trunk on the right side and into the 
thoracic duct on the left side. A few efferents from this 
group drain into the supraclavicular lymph nodes. 
Although these lymph nodes are located very deeply but 
can be palpated by pushing the fingers of one hand into 
the apex of axilla from below and fingers of the other 
hand behind the clavicle from above.
N.B. The axillary lymph nodes are also described in terms 
of levels at which they are situated, viz.
• Level I nodes: They lie lateral to the lower border of 
pectoralis minor muscle.
• Level II nodes: They lie deep to the pectoralis minor 
muscle.
• Level III nodes: They lie medial to the upper border of 
pectoralis minor muscle.
The lymph nodes first receive the lymph from the area of 
breast involved in cancer are termed sentinel lymph nodes. 
These are usually the level I lymph nodes. The sentinel 
nodes are confirmed by injecting a radioactive substance 
into the affected area of the breast.
5. Ulnar nerve
Divisions
Trunks
Roots
4. Median nerve
3. Radial nerve
1. Axillary nerve
2. Musculocutaneous
nerve
Cords
Key branches
Fig. 4.9 Components and key branches of the brachial 
plexus.
--- Page 69 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
Roots
The roots (five) are constituted of anterior primary rami of 
C5 to T1 spinal nerves. They are located in neck, deep to 
scalenus anterior muscle.
Trunks
The trunks (three) are formed as follows:
The C5 and C6 roots join to form the upper trunk; the C7 
root alone forms the middle trunk and, C8 and T1 roots join 
to form the lower trunk. They lie in the neck occupying the 
cleft between scalenus medius behind and the scalenus 
anterior in front.
Divisions
Each trunk divides into anterior and posterior divisions. 
They lie behind the clavicle.
Cords
The cords (three) are formed as follows: the anterior 
divisions of the upper and middle trunks unite to form the 
lateral cord and the anterior division of the lower trunk 
continues as the medial cord. The posterior divisions of the 
three trunks unite to form the posterior cord.
Lateral
pectoral nerve
Long thoracic nerve
Medial pectoral nerve
Medial cutaneous nerve of arm
Medial cutaneous nerve of forearm
Medial root of median nerve
Cords
Divisions
Trunks
Roots
Ulnar nerve
Median nerve
Radial nerve
Axillary nerve
Musculocutaneous
nerve
 Lateral root of
median nerve
Fig. 4.10 Brachial plexus and its branches (SS = suprascapular nerve, NS = nerve to subclavius, US = upper subscapular 
nerve, LS = lower subscapular nerve, T = thoraco-dorsal nerve, DS = dorsal scapular nerve).
Branches (Fig. 4.10)
A. From roots
1. Long thoracic nerve/nerve to serratus anterior (C5, C6, 
and C7).
2. Dorsal scapular nerve/nerve to rhomboids (C5).
In addition to the long thoracic nerve and dorsal scapular 
nerve, branches are given by the roots to supply scalene 
muscles and longus colli (C5, C6, C7, and C8) and there is 
contribution to phrenic nerve (C5).
B. From trunks
1. Suprascapular nerve (C5 and C6)
2. Nerve to subclavius (C5 and C6)
N.B. The branches arising from roots and trunks are 
supraclavicular branches of brachial plexus.
C. From cords
1. From lateral cord
(a) Lateral pectoral nerve (C5, C6, and C7).
(b) Lateral root of median nerve (C5, C6, and C7).
(c) Musculocutaneous nerve (C5, C6, and C7).
--- Page 70 ---
Axilla (Armpit)
Fig. 4.13 Policeman receiving a tip position of the upper 
limb in Erb's paralysis.
Fig. 4.11 Erb’s point.
Nerve to subclavius
Suprascapular nerve
Anterior
division
Erb’s point
Posterior
division
2. From medial cord
(a) Medial pectoral nerve (C8 and T1).
(b) Medial cutaneous nerve of arm (T1).
(c) Medial cutaneous nerve of forearm (C8 and T1).
(d) Medial root of median nerve (C8 and T1).
(e) Ulnar nerve (C7, C8, and T1).
3. From posterior cord
(a) Radial nerve (C5, C6, C7, C8, and T1).
(b) Axillary nerve (C5 and C6).
(c) Thoraco-dorsal nerve/nerve to latissimus dorsi (C6, 
C7, and C8).
(d) Upper subscapular nerve (C5 and C6).
(e) Lower subscapular nerve (C5 and C6).
N.B. Erb’s point (Fig. 4.11): It is the region of upper trunk of 
brachial plexus where six nerves meet as follows: 5th and 
6th cervical roots join to form the upper trunk, which gives 
off two nerves—suprascapular and nerve to subclavius, and 
then divides into anterior and posterior divisions.
• Lesions of the Brachial plexus: For understanding the 
effects of the lesions of the brachial plexus, the student 
will find it helpful to know the spinal segments, which 
control the various movements of the upper limb:
– Adduction of the shoulder is controlled by C5 segment.
– Abduction of the shoulder is controlled by C6 and C7 
segments.
– Flexion of the elbow is controlled by C5 and C6 
segments.
– Extension of the elbow is controlled by C6 and C7 
segments.
– Flexion of the wrist and fingers is controlled by C8 and 
T1 segments.
Clinical correlation
Fig. 4.12 Injury of the upper brachial plexus leading to 
excessive increase in the angle between the head and 
shoulder: A, fall from the height and landing on a shoulder; 
B, Traction of the arm and hyperextension of the neck.
Fig. 4.14 Injury of the lower brachial plexus leading to 
excessive increase in the angle between the trunk and 
shoulder: A, sudden upward pull of the arm; B, arm pulled 
during delivery.
--- Page 71 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
Table 4.2 Features of Erb’s and Klumpke’s paralyses
Erb’s paralysis
Klumpke’s paralysis
Nerve roots involved
C5 and C6
C8 and T1
Muscles paralyzed
Deltoid, supraspinatus infraspinatus, biceps brachii, 
brachialis, brachioradialis, supinator and extensor carpi 
radialis longus
All intrinsic muscles of the hand
Position of the upper limb/hand
Policeman’s tip/Porter’s tip/Waiter’s tip position
Claw hand
Sensory loss (sometimes)
Along the outer aspect of the arm
Along the medial border of forearm 
and hand
Autonomic signs
Absent
Present (Horner’s syndrome)
(b) Klumpke’s paralysis (lower plexus injury): It is caused by 
the hyperabduction of the arm, which may occur when 
one falls on an outstretched hand or an arm is pulled into 
machinery or during delivery (extended arm in a breech 
presentation (Fig. 4.14). The nerve roots involved in this 
injury are C8 and T1 and sometimes C7. The clinical 
features of Klumpke’s paralysis are as follows:
– Claw hand, due to paralysis of the flexors of the 
wrist and fingers (C6, C7, and C8), and all intrinsic 
muscles of the hand (C8 and T1).
– Loss of sensations along the medial border of the 
forearm and hand (T1).
– Horner’s syndrome, (characterized by partial ptosis, 
miosis, anhydrosis, and enophthalmos) due to 
involvement of sympathetic fibres supplying head 
and neck, which leave the spinal cord through T1.
The important features of Erb’s and Klumpke’s paralysis 
are enumerated in Table 4.2.
• Surgical approach to axilla: The axilla is approached 
surgically through the skin of the floor of axilla for the 
excision of axillary lymph nodes to treat the cancer of the 
breast. The structures at risk during this procedure are 
(a) intercostobrachial nerve, (b) long thoracic nerve, 
(c) thoraco-dorsal nerve, and (d) thoraco-dorsal artery. 
Effort should be made to safeguard the above structures.
The important lesions of the brachial plexus are as follows:
(a) Erb’s paralysis (upper plexus injury): It is caused by 
the excessive increase in the angle between the head 
and shoulder, which may occur by fall from the back of 
horse and landing on shoulder or traction of the arm 
during birth of a child (Fig. 4.12). This involves upper 
trunk (C5 and C6 roots) and leads to a typical deformity 
of the limb called policeman’s tip hand/porter’s tip 
hand/waiter's tip hand. In this deformity, the arm 
hangs by the side, adducted and medially rotated, and 
forearm is extended and pronated (Fig. 4.13). The 
detailed account of clinical features of Erb’s paralysis 
is as follows:
– Adduction of arm due to paralysis deltoid muscle.
– Medial rotation of arm due to paralysis supraspinatus, 
infraspinatus, and teres minor muscles.
– Extension of elbow, due to paralysis of biceps 
brachii.
– Pronation of forearm due to paralysis of biceps 
brachii.
– Loss of sensation (minimal) along the outer aspect 
of arm due to involvement of roots of C6 spinal 
nerve.
--- Page 73 ---
Back of the Body and 
Scapular Region
CHAPTER
The superficial structures on the back of the body are studied 
with the upper limb because the shoulder girdle is attached 
posteriorly with the axial skeleton by a number of muscles. 
These muscles are called posterior axio-appendicular 
muscles. They play an important role in the movements of 
the scapula. Further removal of the scapula in malignant 
disease (e.g., fibrosarcoma) requires detailed knowledge of 
the muscles, nerves, and vessels on the back.
SURFACE LANDMARKS (Fig. 5.1)
1. Scapula (shoulder blade) is the most important surface 
landmark on the back. It is placed at a tangent on the 
posterolateral aspect of the rib cage. Vertically, it extends 
from 2nd to 7th rib. Although it is thickly covered by the 
muscles, still most of its outline can be felt in the living 
individual:
Fig. 5.1 Surface landmarks on the back of the body.
Crest of spine of scapula
Acromion process
Scapula
(shoulder blade)
8th rib
12th rib
Posterior superior
iliac spine
S2 spine
Iliac crest
Nuchal furrow
External occipital
protuberance
Spine of C7 vertebra
(vertebra prominens)
Spine of T2 vertebra
Superior nuchal line
Spine of T3 vertebra
Spine of T7 vertebra
Erector spine muscle
Coccyx
Natal cleft
Medial border of scapula
Inferior angle of scapula
7th rib
--- Page 74 ---
Back of the Body and Scapular Region
(a) Acromion process can be easily felt at the top of the 
shoulder.
(b) Crest of the spine of the scapula, runs medially and 
slightly downwards from the acromion to the medial 
border of the scapula, hence it can be easily palpated 
by finger drawn along it.
(c) Medial border can be traced upwards to the superior 
angle and downwards to the inferior angle. The 
superior angle of the scapula lies opposite the spine 
of T2 vertebra, the root of the spine lies at the level 
of T3 vertebra and the inferior angle of the scapula 
lies at the level of T7 vertebra.
N.B. The scapula is freely mobile as about 15 muscles are 
attached to its processes and fossae. The two scapulae are 
drawn apart when the arms are folded across the chest. The 
medial borders of the two scapulae are close to the midline 
when shoulders are drawn back.
2. Eighth rib is palpable, immediately inferior to the 
inferior angle of the scapula. The lower ribs can be 
counted from it.
3. Twelfth rib can be palpated if it projects beyond the 
lateral margin of the erector spinae muscle, about 3 cm 
above the iliac crest.
4. Iliac crest is felt as a curved bony ridge below the waist. 
When traced forwards and backwards, it ends as anterior 
and posterior superior iliac spines, respectively. The 
posterior superior iliac spine may be felt in shallow 
dimple of skin above the buttock, about 5 cm from the 
median line.
5. Sacrum—the back of sacrum lies between the right and 
left dimples (vide supra) and its spines can be palpated 
in the median plane.
6. Coccyx is a slightly movable bone and may be felt deep 
between the buttocks in the natal cleft.
7. Spines of vertebrae lie in the median furrow of the back 
and may be felt. The spine of 7th cervical vertebra 
(vertebra prominens) is readily felt at the root of the neck 
at the lower end of nuchal furrow.
The approximate levels of other spines are given in 
Table 5.1.
8. External occipital protuberance and superior nuchal 
lines—the external occipital protuberance is a bony 
projection felt in the midline on the back of the head. 
The curved bony ridge extending laterally on each side 
from external occipital protuberance is the superior 
nuchal line. These bony features demarcate the junction 
between the head and neck posteriorly.
9. Nuchal groove furrow is the median furrow, which 
extends from external occipital protuberance to the 
spine of C7 vertebra.
10. Ligamentum nuchae is the median fibrous partition on 
the back of neck, which extends from external occipital 
protuberance to the spine of C7 vertebra and separates 
the short cervical spines from the skin.
CUTANEOUS NERVES (Fig. 5.2)
The cutaneous nerves on the back are derived from the 
posterior rami of the spinal nerves. Each primary ramus 
divides into medial and lateral branches:
Nuchal furrow
External
occipital
protuberance
Spine of C7
Iliac crest
Fig. 5.2 Cutaneous nerves of the back.
Table 5.1 Approximate levels of some spines on the back 
of the body
Vertebral spine
Level
Superior angle of the scapula
Where crest of spine of the scapula meets 
its medial border
Inferior angle of the scapula
Highest point of iliac crest
Posterior-superior iliac spine
--- Page 75 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
1. Up to T6, the cutaneous innervation is provided by 
medial branches, which emerge close to the median 
plane.
2. Below T6, the cutaneous innervation is provided by 
lateral branches, which emerge in line with the lateral 
edge of the erector spinae muscle.
The cutaneous branches of upper three lumbar nerves 
emerge a short distance above the iliac crest and turn down 
over it to supply the skin of the gluteal region.
N.B. The posterior rami of C1, C7, C8, L4, and L5 do not 
give any cutaneous branches.
CUTANEOUS ARTERIES
The arteries which accompany the cutaneous nerves on the 
back of body in the thoracic and lumbar regions are the 
dorsal branches of the posterior intercostal and lumbar 
arteries, respectively.
POSTERIOR AXIO-APPENDICULAR MUSCLES
(MUSCLES CONNECTING SCAPULA WITH
THE VERTEBRAL COLUMN)
The muscles that attach the scapula to the back of the trunk 
(vertebral column) are arranged in two layers (two in the 
superficial layer and three in the deep layer).
1. Superficial layer of the muscles
(a) Trapezius.
(b) Latissimus dorsi.
2. Deep layer of the muscles
(a) Levator scapulae.
(b) Rhomboideus major.
(c) Rhomboideus minor.
SUPERFICIAL POSTERIOR AXIO-APPENDICULAR 
MUSCLES
Trapezius Muscle (Fig. 5.3)
The trapezius is a flat triangular muscle on the back of the 
neck and the upper thorax. The muscles of two sides lie side 
by side in the midline and together form a diamond shape/
trapezoid shape, hence the name trapezius.
Origin
It arises from:
(a) medial third of the superior nuchal line,
(b) external occipital protuberance,
(c) ligamentum nuchae,
(d) spine of 7th cervical vertebra, and
(e) spines of all thoracic vertebrae.
Insertion
The insertion occurs as follows:
1. The superior fibres runs downwards and laterally to be 
inserted on to the posterior border of the lateral third of 
the clavicle.
2. The middle fibres proceed horizontally to be inserted on 
to the medial margin of the acromion and upper lip of 
the crest of the spine of the scapula.
3. The lower fibres pass upward and laterally to be inserted 
on to the deltoid tubercle at the junction of medial and 
middle third of the spine of the scapula.
Nerve supply
It is by:
(a) spinal part of the accessory nerve (provides motor 
supply), and
(b) ventral rami of C3 and C4 (carry proprioceptive 
sensations).
TRAPEZIUS
LATISSIMUS DORSI
Lower 3 or 4 ribs
Floor of
bicipital groove
Spine of
scapula
Iliac crest
Acromion
Clavicle
Spines of all
the thoracic
vertebrae
Thoraco-
lumbar fascia
Spine of C7
Ligamentum
nuchae
External occipital
protuberance
Medial 1/3rd of
superior nuchal line
Fig. 5.3 Origin and insertion of the trapezius and latissimus 
dorsi muscles.
--- Page 76 ---
Back of the Body and Scapular Region
Actions
1. The upper fibres of trapezius along with levator scapulae 
elevate the scapula as in shrugging the shoulder.
2. The middle fibres of trapezius along with rhomboids 
retract the scapula as in bracing back the shoulder.
3. The lower fibres of trapezius depress the medial part of 
the spine of the scapula.
4. Acting with serratus anterior, the trapezius rotates the 
scapula forward so that the arm can be abducted beyond 
90°.
Clinical testing
Palpate the trapezius while the shoulder is shrugged against 
the resistance. Inability to shrug (to raise) the shoulder is 
suggestive of muscle weakness.
Latissimus Dorsi (L. Latissimus = widest, Dorsi = back)
The latissimus dorsi is a wide, flat, triangular muscle on the 
back (lumbar region and lower thorax). It is mostly 
superficial except a small portion, covered posteriorly by the 
lower part of trapezius.
Origin
It arises from:
(a) spines of lower six thoracic vertebrae anterior to the 
trapezius, by tendinous fibres,
(b) posterior lamina of thoraco-lumbar fascia (by which it is 
attached to the spines of lumbar and sacral vertebrae) by 
tendinous fibres,
(c) outer lip of the posterior part of the iliac crest by 
muscular slips,
(d) lower three or four ribs by fleshy slips,
(e) inferior angle of the scapula.
Insertion
From its extensive origin the fibres pass laterally with 
different degrees of obliquity (the upper fibres are nearly 
horizontal, the middle are oblique, and lower are almost 
vertical) to form a sheet that overlaps the inferior angle of 
the scapula. This sheet curves around the inferolateral border 
of the teres major to gain its anterior surface. Here it ends as 
flattened tendon, which is inserted into the floor of 
intertubercular sulcus (bicipital groove) of the humerus.
The latissimus dorsi and teres major together form the 
posterior axillary fold.
Nerve supply
The latissimus dorsi is supplied by thoraco-dorsal nerve from 
the posterior cord of the brachial plexus.
Actions
1. Latissimus dorsi is active in adduction, extension, and 
rotation, especially medial rotation of the humerus.
2. It pulls up the trunk upwards and forwards during 
climbing. This action is in conjunction with the 
pectoralis major muscle.
3. It assists backward swinging of the arm during walking.
4. It takes part in all violent expiratory efforts.
N.B. Because of its attachment on the ilium and sacrum, the 
latissimus dorsi is able to elevate the pelvis if the arms are 
stabilized. This action occurs when the arms are stabilized 
on crutch-handles. This is a very good example of ‘reversal 
of muscle action’ where proximal attachment (i.e., origin) 
pulls the distal attachment (i.e., insertion).
Clinical testing
The posterior axillary fold becomes accentuated when a 90° 
abducted arm is adducted against the resistance or when 
patient coughs violently.
• Musculocutaneous flap of latissimus dorsi: The 
latissimus dorsi is supplied by a single dominant vascular 
pedicle formed by the thoraco-dorsal artery, a continuation 
of the subscapular artery. This artery and its accompanying 
venae comitantes and thoraco-dorsal nerve descend in 
the posterior wall of axilla and enter the costal surface of 
the muscle at a single neuro-vascular hilum about 1–4 cm 
medial to the lateral border of the muscle. The presence of 
single dominant vascular pedicle provides the anatomical 
basis for raising the muscle above, or along with the 
overlying skin in the form of musculocutaneous fl ap. The 
musculocutaneous flap of latissimus dorsi is often used in 
reconstructing a breast following mastectomy.
• Conditioning of latissimus dorsi to act as a cardiac 
muscle: The latissimus dorsi if conditioned with pulsated 
electrical impulses, starts functioning like a cardiac 
muscle, i.e., it will be non-fatigable and use oxygen at a 
steady pace. Thus following conditioning, the latissimus 
dorsi can be used as an autotransplant to repair a 
surgically removed portion of heart. The procedure 
involves detaching the latissimus dorsi from its vertebral 
origin keeping the neurovascular pedicle intact and 
slipping it into the pericardial cavity, where it is wrapped 
around the heart like a towel. A pacemaker is required to 
provide the continuous rhythmic contractions.
Clinical correlation
DEEP POSTERIOR AXIO-APPENDICULAR 
MUSCLES (Fig. 5.4)
Levator Scapulae
Origin
The levator scapula is a slender muscle. It arises by tendinous 
slips from
(a) transverse processes of atlas and axis vertebrae, and
(b) posterior tubercles of the transverse processes of the 3rd 
and 4th cervical vertebrae.
--- Page 79 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
Table 5.2 Origin, insertion, nerve supply, and actions of the muscles connecting scapula with the vertebral column
Muscle
Origin
Insertion
Nerve supply
Actions
Trapezius
• Medial 1/3rd of superior 
nuchal line
• Ligamentum nuchae
• External occipital 
protuberance 
• Spines of C7–T12 vertebrae
• Lateral 1/3rd of clavicle
• Medial margin of 
acromion
• Superior margin of 
spine of the scapula 
• Spinal accessory 
(motor)
• C3, C4 spinal 
nerves 
(proprioceptive)
• Upper fibres elevates the 
scapula
• Middle fibres retract the 
scapula
• Lower fibres depress the 
scapula 
Latissimus dorsi
• Spines of T7–T12 vertebrae
• Thoraco-lumbar fascia
• Iliac crest
• Lower 3 or 4 ribs
• Inferior angle of the scapula
Floor of intertubercular 
sulcus of the humerus
Thoraco-dorsal nerve 
(C6, C7, C8)
• Adduction, 
• Extension and medial 
rotation of the arm
• Raises body towards arm 
as in climbing
Levator scapulae
Transverse processes of C1–C4 
vertebrae
Medial border of the 
scapula between the 
superior angle and root 
of spine
• Dorsal scapular 
nerve (C5)
• C3 and C4 spinal 
nerves 
(proprioceptive)
Elevation and medial 
rotation of the scapula and 
tilts its glenoid cavity 
inferiorly
Rhomboideus 
minor
• Lower part of the ligamentum 
nuchae
• Spines of C7 and T1 vertebrae
Base of triangular area at 
the root of spine of the 
scapula
• Dorsal scapular 
nerve (C5)
Retraction and elevation of 
the scapula
Rhomboideus 
major
Spines of T2–T5 vertebrae
Medial border of the 
scapula from root of 
spine to the inferior angle
Dorsal scapular nerve 
(C5)
Retraction, medial rotation, 
and elevation of the 
scapula
converge onto the three septa of insertion, which are 
attached to the deltoid tuberosity. Due to multipennate 
arrangement, the middle acromial part of the deltoid is the 
strongest part (Fig. 5.8).
Nerve supply
The deltoid is supplied by the axillary nerve (C5 and C6).
Fig. 5.7 Origin and insertion of the deltoid muscle.
Shaft of
humerus
Acromion
2. Lateral margin of
 
acromion
3. Crest of 
 spine of
 
scapula
DELTOID
Insertion
V-shaped deltoid
tuberosity of humerus
Spine of scapula
Clavicle
Origin
1. Lateral 1/3rd of
 
clavicle
Fig. 5.8 Architecture of the deltoid muscle.
Deltoid tuberosity of
humerus
Multipennate
lateral fibres
Intramuscular
septum of origin
Unipennate
anterior fibres
Unipennate
posterior
fibres
Intramuscular
septum of 
insertion
Acromion process
--- Page 80 ---
Back of the Body and Scapular Region
Actions
1. The anterior (clavicular) fibres are flexors and medial 
rotators of the arm.
2. The posterior (spinous) fibres are the extensors and 
lateral rotators of the arm.
3. The middle (acromial) fibres are the strong abductor of 
the arm from 15° to 90°.
Middle (acromial) fibres cannot abduct the arm from 0° 
to 15° when the arm is by the side of body because its vertical 
pull corresponds to the long axis of the arm.
N.B. The deltoid muscle is like three muscles in one: the 
anterior fibres flex the arm, lateral fibres abduct the arm and 
posterior fibres extend the arm.
Clinical testing
The deltoid can be easily seen and felt to contract when the 
arm is abducted against resistance.
Site of the intramuscular injection in deltoid: The 
intramuscular injections are commonly given in the lower 
half of the deltoid to avoid injury to the axillary nerve, which 
winds around the surgical neck of the humerus.
N.B. In actual clinical practice, the intramuscular injection is 
given in the upper and outer quadrant of the deltoid region.
Clinical correlation
Structures under cover of deltoid
 
 Bones: Upper end of the humerus and coracoid process.
 
 Joints and ligaments: Shoulder (glenohumeral) joint and 
coracoacromial ligament.
 
 Bursae around the shoulder joint: Subscapular, subacromial/ 
subdeltoid, and infraspinatus.
 
 Muscles:
(a) Insertions of pectoralis minor, pectoralis major, teres 
major, latissimus dorsi, subscapularis, supraspinatus, 
infraspinatus, and teres minor.
(b) Origins of long head of biceps, short head of biceps, 
coracobrachialis, long and lateral heads of triceps.
 
 Vessels: Anterior and posterior circumflex humeral. 
 
 Nerves: Axillary nerve.
 
 Spaces: 
Quadrangular 
triangular 
subscapular 
intermuscular spaces.
Supraspinatus (Fig. 5.9)
Origin
Supraspinatus arises from medial two-third of the 
supraspinous fossa of the scapula.
Insertion
The fibres pass forward and converge under the acromion, 
into a tendon, which crosses above the shoulder joint and is 
inserted on to the superior facet on the greater tubercle of 
the humerus.
Nerve supply
Supraspinatus is supplied by the suprascapular nerve (C5 and 
C6).
Actions
Supraspinatus initiates the abduction of shoulder. It is 
responsible for first 15° of abduction of the shoulder and 
thus assists the deltoid in carrying abduction thereafter, i.e., 
from 15° to 90°.
Clinical testing
The supraspinatus can be palpated deep to the trapezius and 
above the spine of the scapula when the arm is abducted 
against the resistance.
Rupture of supraspinatus tendon: It is a common soft 
tissue injury in the shoulder region. The patient with ruptured 
supraspinatus tendon when asked to raise his hand above 
the head on the affected side, he will first tilt his body on the 
affected side so that arm swings away from the body leading 
to an initial abduction of 15° or he will slightly (about 15°) 
raise the affected arm by the hand of the healthy side—a 
common ‘trick-device’ learned by the patients with ruptured 
supraspinatus tendon.
Clinical correlation
Infraspinatus (Fig. 5.9)
It is a thick triangular muscle, which occupies most of the 
infraspinous fossa.
Fig. 5.9 Origin and insertion of the supraspinatus, 
infraspinatus, teres minor, and teres major muscles 
(TM = teres minor).
Teres major
Teres major
Infraspinatus
Teres minor
Infraspinatus
Supraspinatus
Supraspinatus
--- Page 81 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
Origin
It arises from the medial two-third of the fossa by tendinous 
fibres from ridges on its surface.
Insertion
Its fibres converge to form a tendon, which passes across the 
posterior aspect of the shoulder joint to be inserted on to the 
middle facet of the greater tubercle of the humerus.
Nerve supply
Infraspinatus is supplied by the suprascapular nerve (C5 and 
C6).
Action
Infraspinatus is the lateral rotator of the humerus.
Clinical testing
The infraspinatus can be palpated inferior to the spine of 
the scapula when the arm is laterally rotated against the 
resistance.
Teres Minor (Fig. 5.9)
Origin
This narrow elongated muscle arises from posterior aspect of 
the lateral border of the scapula.
Insertion
The fibres run upwards and laterally across the shoulder 
joint to be inserted on to the lower facet of the greater 
tubercle of the humerus.
Nerve supply
Teres minor is supplied by a branch of the axillary nerve (C5 
and C6). The nerve to teres minor possesses a pseudoganglion.
Actions
Teres minor acts as a lateral rotator and weak adductor of the 
humerus.
Teres Major (Fig. 5.9)
Origin
This thick flat muscle arises from the oval area on the dorsal 
surface of the inferior angle and adjoining lateral border of 
the scapula.
Insertion
The fibres run upwards and laterally, and end in a flat tendon, 
which is inserted on to the medial lip of the intertubercular 
sulcus of the humerus.
Nerve supply
Teres major is supplied by the lower subscapular nerve (C5, 
C6, and C7).
Action
Teres major acts as a medial rotator of the arm.
Subscapularis (Fig. 5.10)
It is a bulky triangular muscle, which fills the subscapular 
fossa.
Origin
Subscapularis arises from (a) medial two-third of the costal 
surface of the scapula and (b) tendinous intermuscular septa 
attached to the ridges on the bone.
Insertion
The fibres converge laterally into a broad tendon, which 
passes in front of the capsule of glenohumeral joint to be 
inserted on to the lesser tubercle of the humerus. The tendon 
is separated from the neck of the scapula by a large 
subscapular bursa, which generally communicates with the 
synovial cavity of the shoulder joint.
Nerve supply
The subscapularis is supplied by the upper and lower 
subscapular nerves (C5, C6).
Actions
Subscapularis is the medial rotator of the humerus. 
Together with supraspinatus, infraspinatus, and teres minor 
it stabilizes the head of the humerus in glenoid fossa during 
shoulder movements.
The origin, insertion, nerve supply, and actions of the 
scapulohumeral muscles are described in Table 5.3.
ROTATOR CUFF MUSCLES
The four of scapulohumeral muscles, viz. supraspinatus 
infraspinatus, teres minor, and subscapularis (often referred 
to as SITS muscles) are called rotator cuff muscles for 
they form musculotendinous/rotator cuff around the 
glenohumeral joint.
Fig. 5.10 Origin and insertion of the subscapularis muscle.
Insertion
Lesser tubercle of
humerus
Origin
Subscapular 
fossa and
tendinous
intramuscular
septa
--- Page 82 ---
Back of the Body and Scapular Region
Table 5.3 Origin, insertion, nerve supply, and actions of the scapulohumeral muscles
Muscle
Origin
Insertion
Nerve supply
Actions
Deltoid
(a) Clavicular part –
unipennate
(b) Acromial part –
multipennate
(c) Spinous part –
unipennate
• Anterior aspect of 
lateral 1/3rd of clavicle
• Lateral border of 
acromion
• Lower lip of the spine 
of scapula
Deltoid tuberosity of 
humerus
Axillary nerve (C5, C6)
• Flexion and medial 
rotation by the anterior 
fibres
• Abduction (15°–90°) of 
the arm by middle fibres
• Extension and medial 
rotation of the arm by 
posterior fibres
Supraspinatus 
(multipennate)
• Medial 2/3rd of the 
supraspinous fossa of 
scapula
Superior facet of greater 
tubercle of the humerus
Suprascapular nerve (C5, 
Initiates abduction of the 
arm and carries it up to 15°
Infraspinatus 
(multipennate)
• Medial 2/3rd of the 
infraspinous fossa of 
scapula
Middle facet of greater 
tubercle of the humerus
Suprascapular nerve (C5, 
Lateral rotation of the arm
Teres minor
Upper 2/3rd of the 
dorsal aspect of the 
lateral border of scapula
Inferior facet of greater 
tubercle of the humerus
Axillary nerve (C5, C6)
Lateral rotation of the arm
Teres major
Inferior 1/3rd of the 
dorsal aspect of the 
lateral border and 
inferior angle of scapula
Medial lip of the 
intertubercular sulcus of 
the humerus
Lower subscapular nerve 
(C5, C6)
Abduction and medial 
rotation of the arm
Subscapularis 
(multipennate)
• Medial 2/3rd of the 
subscapular fossa
• Tendinous 
intermuscular septa
Lesser tubercle of the 
humerus
Upper and lower 
subscapular nerves (C5, 
C6, C7) 
• Adduction and medial 
rotation of the arm
• Helps to hold the humeral 
head in glenoid cavity
Supraspinatus 
Capsule of
shoulder joint
Glenoid cavity
Glenoid labrum
Teres minor
Infraspinatus
Gap in the
joint capsule for 
subscapular bursa
Joint cavity
Subscapularis
Fig. 5.11 Musculotendinous (rotator) cuff.
ROTATOR CUFF (MUSCULOTENDINOUS CUFF)
The rotator cuff (Fig. 5.11) is the name given to the tendons 
supraspinatus, 
infraspinatus, 
teres 
minor, 
subscapularis which are fused with the underlying capsule of 
the glenohumeral joint. Tendon of supraspinatus fuse 
superiorly, tendons of infraspinatus and teres minor fuse 
posteriorly, and that of subscapularis fuse anteriorly. This 
cuff plays an important role in stabilizing the shoulder joint. 
The primary function of rotator cuff muscles is to grasp the 
relatively large head of humerus and hold it against the smaller, 
shallow glenoid cavity (Fig. 6.8A).
MOVEMENTS OF THE SCAPULA (Fig. 5.12)
The scapula is able to glide freely on the posterior chest wall 
because of the loose connective tissue between the serratus 
anterior and the chest wall.
The movements of scapula are produced by the muscles 
that attach it to the trunk and indirectly by the muscles 
passing from trunk to the humerus when the glenohumeral 
joint is fixed.
--- Page 83 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
Fig. 5.12 Movements of the scapula (A–F).
Serratus
anterior
Pectoralis
minor
Protraction
Lower fibres of
trapezius
Serratus anterior
(lower 5 digitations)
Upper fibres of
trapezius
Lateral rotation
Weight of
limb
Pectoralis minor
Trapezius
lower fibres
Latissimus
dorsi
Depression
Rhomboideus
minor
Rhomboideus
major
Middle fibres of
trapezius
Retraction
Medial rotation
Levator scapulae
Rhomboideus
major
Rhomboideus
minor
Levator
scapulae
Upper fibres of 
trapezius
Elevation
All the movements of scapula occurring on the chest wall 
(scapulothoracic linkage) involves concomitant movements 
at sternoclavicular and acromioclavicular joints.
The various movements of the scapula are as follows:
1. Protraction.
2. Retraction.
3. Elevation.
4. Depression.
5. Rotation (lateral and medial).
Protraction: In this movement, scapula moves forwards on 
the chest wall. It is produced by serratus anterior assisted by 
the pectoralis minor muscle. Protraction is required for 
punching (e.g., boxing), pushing, and reaching forwards.
Retraction: In this movement, the scapulae are drawn 
backwards towards the median plane in bracing back of the 
shoulders. It is produced by middle fibres of trapezius and 
rhomboids.
Elevation: The scapula is elevated, as in shrugging, by 
simultaneous contraction of the levator scapulae and upper 
fibres of the trapezius.
Depression: The scapula is depressed by simultaneous 
contraction of the pectoralis minor, lower fibres of trapezius, 
and latissimus dorsi.
Rotation: The rotation of scapula takes place around the 
horizontal axis passing through the middle of the spine of 
scapula and sternoclavicular joint.
1. Medial rotation is brought about by simultaneous 
contraction of levator scapulae, rhomboids, and 
latissimus dorsi. The gravity (e.g., weight of the upper 
limb) plays a key role in this movement.
2. Lateral rotation is brought about by the trapezius (its 
upper fibres raise the acromion process and its lower 
fibres depress the medial end of the spine of the scapula) 
and serratus anterior (its lower 5 digitations pull the 
inferior angle of the scapula forwards and laterally). The 
lateral rotation of the scapula tilts its glenoid cavity 
upwards—which is essential for abduction of the upper 
limb above 90°.
The movements of scapula and the muscles, which 
produce them are summarized in Table 5.4 and Figure 5.12.
--- Page 85 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
NERVES AND VESSELS
AXILLARY NERVE (Fig. 5.15)
The axillary nerve (C5, C6) arises from the posterior cord of 
the brachial plexus near the lower border of the subscapularis. 
It runs backwards on subscapularis to pass through the 
quadrangular space along with the posterior circumflex 
humeral artery. Here it is intimately related to the medial 
aspect of the surgical neck of the humerus immediately 
inferior to the capsule of the shoulder joint. The nerve gives 
a branch to the shoulder joint, and then runs laterally to 
divide into the anterior and posterior divisions/branches, 
deep to deltoid.
The posterior branch supplies teres minor and posterior 
part of the deltoid. It then continues over the posterior 
border of the deltoid as upper lateral cutaneous nerve of the 
arm and supplies the skin over the lower half of the deltoid. 
The nerve to teres minor possesses a ‘pseudoganglion’.
The anterior branch continues horizontally between the 
deltoid and surgical neck of the humerus with posterior 
circumflex humeral vessels. It supplies deltoid and sends a 
few branches through it to innervate the overlying skin.
Injury of the axillary nerve: The axillary nerve is at risk of 
damage in inferior dislocation of the head of humerus from 
shoulder joint and in fractures of the surgical neck of the 
humerus because of its close relation to these structures 
(Fig. 6.2B). The damage of axillary nerve presents the 
following clinical features:
• Impaired abduction of the shoulder—due to paralysis of 
the deltoid and teres minor muscles.
• Loss of sensations over the lower half of the deltoid 
(‘regimental badge’ area of the sensory loss)—due to 
involvement of the upper lateral cutaneous nerve of the arm.
• Loss of shoulder contour with prominence of greater 
tubercle of the humerus—due to wasting of the deltoid 
muscle.
Clinical correlation
CIRCUMFLEX HUMERAL ARTERIES
These arteries arise from the third part of the axillary artery 
and together form a circular anastomosis around the surgical 
neck of the humerus.
ARTERIAL ANASTOMOSIS AROUND THE SCAPULA
This anastomosis is clinically important because it ensures 
adequate arterial supply to scapula and provides a subsidiary 
route through which the blood can pass from the first part of 
the subclavian artery to the third part of the axillary artery 
when either the subclavian artery or axillary artery is blocked 
between these two sites (for details see Chapter 4, pages 51 
and 52).
Fig. 5.15 Axillary nerve as seen in the horizontal section of 
deltoid region at the level of surgical neck of the humerus.
Anterior circumflex
humeral artery
Axillary artery
Posterior circumflex
humeral artery
Humerus
Axillary nerve
Posterior branch
Nerve to
teres minor
Anterior branch
Pseudoganglion
Upper lateral cutaneous
nerve of arm
Deltoid
muscle
--- Page 87 ---
Shoulder Joint Complex 
(Joints of Shoulder Girdle)
CHAPTER
The ‘shoulder joint complex’ consists of four basic 
articulations, namely (Fig. 6.1),
1. Glenohumeral joint.
2. Acromioclavicular joint.
3. Sternoclavicular joint.
4. Scapulothoracic articulation/scapulothoracic linkage 
(functional linkage between the scapula and thorax).
Normal function of the shoulder girdle requires smooth 
coordination of movements on all these joints. The 
impairment of any one of these joints leads to functional 
defect of the whole complex.
The main function of the shoulder in man is to enable 
him to place his hand where he wishes to in a coordinated 
and controlled manner.
From weight-bearing forelimb of a quadruped to a freely 
mobile upper limb in human beings, substantial phylogenetic 
changes have occurred in the shoulder girdle. In human 
beings, shoulder girdle has sacrificed stability for mobility, 
which is responsible for most of the pathological changes 
that take place in it.
The glenohumeral joint is the primary articulation of the 
shoulder girdle and generally termed shoulder joint by the 
clinicians. It is quite commonly affected by disease hence it 
needs to be described in detail.
SHOULDER JOINT (GLENOHUMERAL JOINT)
It is a joint between the head of humerus and glenoid cavity 
of the scapula.
The shoulder joint is the most movable joint of the body 
and consequently one of the least stable. It is most common 
joint to dislocate and to undergo recurrent dislocations. 
Therefore, the students must study it very thoroughly.
Type
The shoulder joint is a ball-and-socket type of synovial joint 
(Fig. 6.2).
ARTICULAR SURFACES (Fig. 6.2)
The shoulder joint is formed by articulation of large round 
head of humerus with the relatively shallow glenoid cavity 
of the scapula. The glenoid cavity is deepened slightly but 
effectively by the fibrocartilaginous ring called glenoid 
labrum.
LIGAMENTS (Figs 6.3–6.5)
The ligaments of the shoulder joint are as follows:
Fig. 6.1 Articulations of the shoulder complex (joints of the 
shoulder girdle).
Sternoclavicular joint
Acromioclavicular
joint
Scapulothoracic
 linkage
Glenohumeral
joint
--- Page 88 ---
Shoulder Joint Complex (Joints of Shoulder Girdle)
Fig. 6.2 Shoulder joint: A, a radiograph showing articular surfaces; B, coronal section. (Source: Fig. 7.25, Page 628, Gray’s 
Anatomy for Students, Richard L Drake, Wayne Vogl, Adam WM Mitchell. Copyright Elsevier Inc. 2005, All rights reserved.)
Posterior circumflex
humeral artery
Axillary nerve
Deltoid
Subacromial/
subdeltoid bursa
Supraspinatus 
Joint capsule
Acromion
process
Coracoid
process
Coracoacromial arch
Glenoid labrum
Glenoid cavity of
scapula
Coracoacromial
ligament
Acromion
Glenoid cavity of
scapula
Clavicle
Head of humerus
Fig. 6.3 Interior of the shoulder joint exposed from behind 
to show the glenohumeral ligaments.
Inferior
Capsule of
glenohumeral joint
Glenohumeral
ligaments 
Middle
Superior
Long head of
biceps brachii
Glenoid labrum
Fig. 6.4 Coracoacromial, coracohumeral, and transverse 
humeral ligaments as seen from the anterior aspect.
Joint capsule
Bicipital
groove
Coracohumeral
ligament
Coracoacromial
ligament
Transverse
humeral
ligament
Acromion
Coracoid 
process
1. Capsular ligament (joint capsule): The thin fibrous 
layer of the joint capsule surrounds the glenohumeral 
joint. It is attached medially to the margins of the 
glenoid cavity beyond the glenoid labrum and laterally 
to the anatomical neck of the humerus, except inferiorly 
where it extends downwards 1.5 cm or more on the 
surgical neck of the humerus. Medially the attachment 
extends beyond the supraglenoid tubercle thus 
enclosing the long head of biceps brachii within the 
joint cavity.
A portion of epiphyseal line of proximal humerus is 
intracapsular, therefore, septic arthritis of the shoulder joint 
may occur following metaphyseal osteomyelitis.
Clinical correlation
--- Page 89 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
The synovial membrane lines the inner surface of the 
joint capsule and reflects from it to the glenoid labrum 
and humerus as far as the articular margin of the head. 
The synovial cavity of the joint presents the following 
features:
(a) It forms tubular sheath around the tendon of biceps 
brachii where it lies in the bicipital groove of the 
humerus.
 (b) It communicates with subscapular and infraspinatus 
bursae, around the joint.
Thus there are three apertures in the joint capsule:
(a) An opening between the tubercles of the humerus 
for the passage of tendon of long head of biceps 
brachii.
(b) An opening situated anteriorly inferior to the 
coracoid process to allow communication between 
the synovial cavity and subscapular bursa.
(c) An 
opening 
situated 
posteriorly 
allow 
communication between synovial cavity and 
infraspinatus bursa.
2. Glenohumeral ligaments: There are three thickenings 
in the anterior part of the fibrous capsule; to strengthen 
it. These are called superior, middle, and inferior 
glenohumeral ligaments. They are visible only from 
interior of the joint.
A defect exists between superior and middle 
glenohumeral ligaments, which acquire importance in 
the anterior dislocation of the shoulder joint.
3. Coracohumeral ligament: It is a strong band of fibrous 
tissue that passes from the base of the coracoid process 
to the anterior aspect of the greater tubercle of the 
humerus.
4. Transverse humeral ligament: It is a broad fibrous band, 
which bridges the bicipital groove between the greater 
and lesser tubercles. This ligament converts the groove 
into a canal that provides passage to the tendon of long 
head of biceps surrounded by a synovial sheath.
ACCESSORY LIGAMENTS
The accessory ligaments of the shoulder joint are as follows:
1. Coracoacromial ligament: It extends between coracoid 
and acromion processes. It protects the superior aspect 
of the joint.
Coracoacromial arch: The coracoacromial arch is formed 
by coracoid process, acromion process, and coracoacromial 
ligament between them. This osseoligamentous structure 
forms a protective arch for the head of humerus above 
and prevents its superior displacement above the glenoid 
cavity. The supraspinatus muscle passes under this arch 
and lies deep to the deltoid where its tendon blends with 
the joint capsule. The large subacromial bursa lies 
between the arch superiorly and tendon of supraspinatus 
and greater tubercle of humerus inferiorly. This facilitates 
the movement of supraspinatus tendon.
BURSAE RELATED TO THE SHOULDER JOINT
Several bursae are related to the shoulder joint but the 
important ones are as follows (Fig. 6.6):
1. Subscapular bursa: It lies between the tendon of 
subscapularis and the neck of the scapula; and protects 
the tendon from friction against the neck. This bursa 
usually communicates with the joint cavity.
2. Subacromial bursa (Fig. 6.7): It lies between the 
coracoacromial ligament and acromion process above, 
and supraspinatus tendon and joint capsule below. It 
continues downwards beneath the deltoid, hence it is 
sometimes also referred to as subdeltoid bursa. It is the 
largest synovial bursa in the body and facilitates the 
movements of supraspinatus tendon under the 
coracoacromial arch.
3. Infraspinatus bursa: It lies between the tendon of 
infraspinatus and posterolateral aspect of the joint 
capsule. It may sometime communicate with the joint 
cavity.
N.B. The bursae around the shoulder joint are clinically 
important as some of them communicate with synovial 
cavity of the joint. Consequently, opening a bursa may mean 
entering into the cavity of the joint.
RELATIONS OF THE SHOULDER JOINT (Fig. 6.6)
The shoulder joint is related:
Superiorly: 
to coracoacromial arch, subacromial bursa, 
supraspinatus muscle, and deltoid muscle.
Synovial
membrane
Subscapular
bursa
Coracoacromial
ligament
Acromion process
Transverse
humeral
ligament
Synovial
sheath around
the tendon of
biceps
Tendon of
long head of
biceps brachii
Coracoid 
process
Fig. 6.5 Synovial membrane lining the interior of shoulder 
joint and its extensions.
--- Page 91 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
The coracoacromial arch forms, the secondary socket of 
the glenohumeral joint and protects the joint from the above 
and prevents the upward dislocation of the head of humerus.
The long head of biceps brachii, passes above the head of 
humerus 
intracapsular, 
hence 
prevents 
upward 
displacement.
The glenoid labrum provides protection by deepening the 
shallow glenoid cavity.
MOVEMENTS OF THE SHOULDER JOINT 
(Figs 6.9 and 6.10)
The shoulder joint has more freedom of mobility than any 
other joint in the body, due to the following factors:
1. Laxity of joint capsule.
2. Articulation between relatively large humeral head and 
smaller and shallow glenoid cavity.
The glenohumeral joint permits four groups of movements:
1. Flexion and extension.
2. Abduction and adduction.
3. Medial and lateral rotation.
4. Circumduction.
The movements of shoulder joint occur in all the three 
planes and around all the three axes:
 
 The flexion and extension/hyperextension occur in 
sagittal plane around the frontal axis.
 
 The abduction and adduction occur in frontal plane 
around the sagittal axis.
Fig. 6.8 Action of the rotator cuff muscles: A, they grasp and pull the relatively large head of the humerus medially to hold 
it against the smaller and shallow glenoid cavity; B, combined function of the rotator cuff muscles and deltoid.
Subscapularis
Supraspinatus
Infraspinatus
Teres minor
Humerus
Deltoid
Subscapularis
Infraspinatus
Teres minor
Supraspinatus
Fig. 6.9 Planes of movements of the shoulder joint: 
A, planes of flexion and extension, and abduction and 
adduction; B, plane of medial and lateral rotation.
Lateral
rotation
Medial
rotation
Flexion
Extension
Abduction
Adduction
--- Page 92 ---
Shoulder Joint Complex (Joints of Shoulder Girdle)
Fig. 6.10 Movements of the shoulder joint. (Source: Fig. 7.4, Page 611, Gray’s Anatomy for Students, Richard L Drake, Wayne 
Vogl, Adam WM Mitchell. Copyright Elsevier Inc. 2005, All rights reserved.)
Flexion
Extension
Adduction
Abduction
Medial rotation
Lateral rotation
Abduction
Flexion
Extension
Adduction
Circumduction
 
 The medial and lateral rotation occur in transverse plane 
around the vertical axis.
 
 The circumduction is really only a combination of all 
above movements.
N.B. Plane of the glenohumeral joint: The scapula does not 
lie in the coronal plane but is so oriented that its glenoid 
cavity faces forwards and laterally, therefore the plane of this 
joint lies obliquely at about 45° to the sagittal plane. The 
movements of shoulder joint are, therefore, described in 
relation to this plane.
The details are as under:
1. Flexion and extension: During flexion, the arm moves 
forwards and medially, and during extension it moves 
backwards and laterally. These movements take place 
parallel to the plane of glenoid cavity (i.e., midway 
between the coronal and sagittal plane).
2. Abduction and adduction: During abduction, the arm 
moves anterolaterally away from the trunk and during 
adduction the arm moves posteromedially towards the 
trunk. These movements occur at right angle to the 
plane of flexion and extension (i.e., in the plane of the 
body of the scapula).
3. Medial and lateral rotation: These movements are best 
demonstrated in midflexed elbow. In this position, the 
hand moves medially in medial rotation and laterally in 
lateral rotation.
4. Circumduction: The circumduction at glenohumeral 
joint is an orderly sequence of flexion, abduction, 
extension and adduction or the reverse. During this 
movement the upper limb moves along a circle.
The muscles producing the various movements at the 
shoulder joint are listed in Table 6.1.
--- Page 93 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
Table 6.1 Movements at the shoulder joint and muscles producing them
Movements
Main muscles (prime movers)
Accessory muscles (synergists)
Flexion
• Pectoralis major (clavicular part)
• Deltoid (anterior fibres)
• Biceps brachii (short head)
• Coracobrachialis
• Sternocostal head of pectoralis major
Extension
• Deltoid (posterior fibres)
• Latissimus dorsi
• Teres major
• Long head of triceps
Adduction
• Pectoralis major (sternocostal part)
• Latissimus dorsi
• Teres major
• Coracobrachialis
• Short head of biceps
• Long head of triceps
Abduction
• Deltoid (lateral fibres)
• Supraspinatus
• Serratus anterior
• Upper and lower fibres of trapezius
Medial rotation
• Subscapularis
• Pectoralis major
• Latissimus dorsi
• Deltoid (anterior fibres)
• Teres major
Lateral rotation
• Deltoid (posterior fibres)
• Infraspinatus
• Teres minor
Mechanism of Abduction
The abduction at shoulder is a complex movement, hence 
student must understand it.
The total range of abduction is 180°. Abduction up to 90° 
occurs at the glenohumeral joint. Abduction from 90° to 
120° can occur only if the humerus is rotated laterally. 
Abduction from 120° to 180° can occur if the scapula rotates 
forwards on the chest wall.
The detailed analysis is as under:
1. The articular surface of the head of humerus permits 
elevation of arm only up to 90°, because when the upper 
end of humerus is elevated, to 90° its greater tubercle 
impinges upon the under surface of the acromion and 
can only be released by lateral rotation of the arm.
2. Therefore, the arm rotates laterally and carries abduction 
up to 120°.
3. Abduction above 120° can occur only if scapula rotates. 
So that the scapula rotates forwards on the chest wall.
N.B. 
• The humerus and scapula move in the ratio of 2:1 during 
abduction, i.e., for every 15° elevation, the humerus 
moves 10° and scapula moves 5°.
• During early and terminal stages of elevation, the 
sternoclavicular and acromioclavicular joints move 
maximum, respectively.
Range of motion (ROM) of various movements
During clinical examination, the knowledge of range of 
motion of various movements is very important. It is given 
in the box below:
Movements
Range of motion
• Flexion
• Extension
• Abduction
180°
• Adduction
• Lateral rotation
• Medial rotation
• Dislocation of the shoulder joint: Dislocation of 
shoulder joint mostly occurs inferiorly because the joint is 
least supported on this aspect. It often injures the axillary 
nerve because of its close relation to the inferior part of 
the joint capsule. However, clinically, it is described as 
anterior or posterior dislocation indicating whether the 
humeral head has descended anterior or posterior or to 
the infraglenoid tubercle of the scapula and long head of 
the triceps.
The dislocation is usually caused by excessive extension 
and lateral rotation of the humerus.
Clinically, it presents as (Fig. 6.11):
(a) Hollow in rounded contour of the shoulder
(b) Prominence of shoulder tip
• Frozen shoulder (adhesive capsulitis): It is a clinical 
condition characterized by pain and uniform limitation of 
all movements of the shoulder joint, though there are no 
radiological changes in the joint. It occurs due to shrinkage 
of the joint capsule, hence the name adhesive capsulitis. 
This condition is generally seen in individuals with 40–60 
years of age.
Clinical correlation
--- Page 94 ---
Shoulder Joint Complex (Joints of Shoulder Girdle)
• Rotator cuff disorders: The rotator cuff disorders include 
calcific supraspinatus tendinitis, subacromial the rotator 
cuff represent overall the most common cause of shoulder 
pain. The rotator cuff is commonly injured during repetitive 
use of the upper limb above the horizontal level (e.g., in 
throwing sports, swimming, and weight lifting). The 
deposition of calcium in the supraspinatus tendon is 
common. The calcium deposition irritates the overlying 
subacromial 
bursa 
causing 
subacromial 
bursitis. 
Consequently, when the arm is abducted the inflamed 
bursa 
caught 
between 
tendon 
acromion 
impingement, which causes severe pain. In most people, 
pain occurs during 60°–120° of abduction (painful arc 
syndrome). The rotator cuff disorders usually occur in 
males after 50 years of age.
The pain due to subacromial bursitis is elicited when 
the deltoid is pressed just below the acromion, when the 
arm is adducted. The pain cannot be elicited by the 
pressure on the same point when the arm is abducted 
because the bursa slips/disappears under the acromion 
process (Dawbarn’s sign).
ACROMIOCLAVICULAR JOINT (Fig. 6.12)
Type
It is a plane type of the synovial joint between the lateral end 
of the clavicle and acromion process of the scapula. The 
acromioclavicular joint is located about 2.5 cm medial to the 
point of the shoulder.
Articular Surfaces
These are small facets present on the lateral end of clavicle 
and the medial margin of the acromion process of the 
scapula. The articular surfaces are covered with fibrocartilage. 
The joint cavity is subdivided by an incomplete wedge-
shaped articular disc.
Joint Capsule
It is thin, lax fibrous sac attached to the margins of articular 
surfaces.
Ligaments
These are acromioclavicular and coracoclavicular ligaments.
1. Acromioclavicular ligament: It is a fibrous band that 
extends from acromion to the clavicle. It strengthens the 
acromioclavicular joint superiorly.
2. Coracoclavicular ligament: It lies a little away from the 
joint itself but play an important role in maintaining the 
integrity of the joint.
The coracoclavicular ligament consists of two parts: 
(a) conoid and (b) trapezoid, which are united posteri-
orly and often separated by a bursa.
 
 The conoid ligament is an inverted cone-shaped 
fibrous band. The apex is attached to the root of the 
coracoid process just lateral to the scapular notch and 
base is attached to the conoid tubercle on the inferior 
surface of the clavicle.
 
 The trapezoid ligament is a horizontal fibrous band 
that stretches from upper surface of the coracoid 
process to the trapezoid line on the inferior surface of 
lateral end of the clavicle.
N.B. The coracoclavicular ligament is largely responsible 
for suspending the weight of the scapula and upper limb 
from clavicle.
The coracoclavicular ligament is the strongest ligament 
of the upper limb.
Movements
The acromioclavicular joint permits the rotation of 
acromion of scapula at the acromial end of the clavicle. 
These movements are associated with movements of scapula 
at the scapulothoracic joint/linkage.
STERNOCLAVICULAR JOINT (Fig. 6.12)
Type
The sternoclavicular joint is a saddle type of the synovial 
joint.
Articular Surfaces
The rounded sternal end of clavicle articulates with the 
shallow socket at the superolateral angle of the manubrium 
sterni and adjacent part of the 1st costal cartilage. The medial 
Fig. 6.11 Dislocation of the shoulder joint. Note the 
changes in the contour of shoulder.
Prominence of shoulder tip
Hollowing in shoulder contour
Glenoid cavity
Acromion process
Upper end of humerus
--- Page 95 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
Fig. 6.12 Sternoclavicular and acromioclavicular joints.
Costoclavicular
ligament
Coracoid
process
Coracoclavicular
ligament
Trapezoid
part
Conoid
part
Articular disc
Interclavicular ligament
Incomplete
articular disc
First costal
cartilage
First rib
Sternoclavicular joint
Clavicle
Acromioclavicular joint
Acromion
Manubrium
sterni
end of clavicle rises higher than the manubrium, hence it 
poorly fits into its shallow socket. But a strong thick articular 
disc of fibrocartilage attached superiorly to the clavicle and 
1st costal cartilage inferiorly prevents the displacement of 
the medial end of the clavicle.
The articular surface of clavicle is convex from above 
downwards and slightly concave from front to back. The 
articular surface of sternum is reciprocally curved. The 
articular surfaces are covered with fibrocartilage.
Articular Capsule
The joint capsule is attached to the margins of the articular 
surfaces including the periphery of the articular disc. The 
synovial membrane lines the internal surface of the fibrous 
joint capsule, extending to the edges of the articular disc.
Ligaments
1. Anterior and posterior sternoclavicular ligaments:
They reinforce the joint capsule anteriorly and 
posteriorly. The posterior ligament is weaker than the 
anterior ligament.
2. Interclavicular ligament: It is T-shaped and connects 
the sternal ends of two clavicles and strengthens the 
joint capsule superiorly. In between, it is attached to the 
superior border of the suprasternal notch.
3. Costoclavicular ligament: It anchors the inferior surface 
of the sternal end of clavicle to the first rib and adjoining 
part of its cartilage.
Movements
The sternoclavicular joint allows the movements of pectoral 
girdle. This joint is critical to the movement of the clavicle.
• Dislocation of the sternoclavicular joint: It is rare 
because the sternoclavicular (SC) joint is extremely 
strong. However, dislocation of this joint in people 
below 25 years of age may result from fractures 
through the epiphyseal plate because epiphysis at the 
sternal end of clavicle does not unite until 23–25 years 
of age. The medial end is usually dislocated anteriorly. 
Backward dislocation is prevented by the costoclavicu-
lar ligament.
• Transmission of weight of the upper limb: The 
weight of the upper limb is transmitted from scapula to 
the clavicle through coracoclavicular ligament, and 
then from clavicle to sternum through sternoclavicular 
joint. Some of the weight is transmitted to the first rib 
through costoclavicular ligament (Fig. 1.4). When a 
person falls on the outstretched hand the force of blow 
is usually transmitted along the length of the clavicle, 
i.e., along its long axis. The clavicle may fracture at the 
junction of its middle and lateral third but it is rare for 
the SC joint to dislocate.
• Dislocation of the acromioclavicular joint: It may 
occur following a severe blow on the superolateral part 
of the shoulder. In severe form, both acromioclavicular 
and coracoclavicular ligaments are torn. Consequently 
the shoulder separates from the clavicle and falls 
because of the weight of the limb. The acromioclavicular 
joint dislocation is often termed shoulder separation.
Clinical correlation
SCAPULOTHORACIC ARTICULATION/LINKAGE
The scapulothoracic articulation is not a true articulation 
but a functional linkage between the ventral aspect of the
--- Page 96 ---
Shoulder Joint Complex (Joints of Shoulder Girdle)
scapula and lateral aspect of the thoracic wall. The linkage is 
provided by serratus anterior muscle. The movements of 
scapula around the chest wall are facilitated by the presence 
of loose areolar tissue between the serratus anterior and 
subscapularis muscles.
SCAPULOHUMERAL RHYTHM
Most of the movements at the shoulder involve the 
movements of humerus and scapula simultaneously and 
not successively.
According to older concept, abduction of shoulder up to 
90° occurs at the glenohumeral/scapulohumeral joint and 
beyond 90° the movement is essentially an upward rotation 
of the scapula.
But recently it has been established beyond doubt by 
fluoroscopic studies that there is rotation of scapula even from 
the initial stages of abduction at the shoulder. Thus there is 
rhythm between the scapular and humeral movements called 
scapulo-humeral rhythm. In abduction, there is 1° of lateral 
rotation of scapula for every 2° of movement at the scapulo-
humeral joint. The paralysis of muscles, which interferes with 
this rhythm seriously affects the movements of the shoulder.
--- Page 98 ---
CUTANEOUS INNERVATION
The knowledge of cutaneous innervation is essential during 
physical examination of the patient. The sensory testing of 
skin of the upper limb is performed whenever a damage of 
nerves arising from C3 to T2 spinal segments is suspected. 
Light touch and pinprick are the main sensations tested 
routinely, but the temperature, two-point discrimination, 
and vibration are also tested in special cases. The area of 
anesthesia and paresthesia are mapped out and matched 
with the dermatomal distribution. In compression of nerve 
roots of spinal nerves arising from C3 to T2 spinal segments 
due to spondylitis, pain is referred to the respective 
dermatomes.
CUTANEOUS NERVES OF THE UPPER LIMB
The cutaneous nerves of the upper limb are derived from 
the ventral rami of spinal nerves derived from C3 to T2 
spinal segments. These nerves are derived from the ventral 
rami because the upper limb buds develop from ventral half 
of the body opposite the C3–T2 spinal segments. During 
dissection, the cutaneous nerves are seen to arise from three 
sources, viz.
1. Cervical plexus.
2. Brachial plexus.
3. Intercostobrachial nerve.
The cutaneous nerves carry sensations of pain, touch, 
temperature, and pressure. In addition, they carry 
sympathetic fibres, which supply sweat glands, dermal 
arterioles, and arrector pili muscles. The effect of sympathetic 
stimulation on skin, therefore, is sudomotor, vasomotor, and 
pilomotor, respectively. The area of skin supplied by a single 
spinal nerve/segment is termed ‘dermatome’. The cutaneous 
nerves contain fibres from more than one spinal nerve and each 
spinal nerve provides fibres to more than one cutaneous nerve. 
As a result, skin areas supplied by the cutaneous nerves do not 
correspond with dermatomes.
CUTANEOUS NERVES SUPPLYING DIFFERENT REGIONS 
OF THE UPPER LIMB (Fig. 7.1)
These are as follows:
1. Pectoral region:
Above the 2nd rib, this region is supplied by the 
supraclavicular nerves (C3, C4) and below the 2nd rib 
by the intercostal nerves (T2–T6).
2. Axilla:
The skin of the armpit is supplied by:
(a) intercostobrachial nerve (T2) and
(b) small branches from T3.
3. Shoulder:
(a) Upper half of the deltoid region is supplied by the 
supraclavicular nerves (C3, C4).
(b) Lower half of the deltoid region is supplied by the 
upper lateral cutaneous nerve of the arm, which is a 
cutaneous branch of the axillary nerve.
4. Arm (brachium):
(a) Upper medial part of the arm is supplied by the 
intercostobrachial nerve (T2) derived from 2nd 
intercostal.
(b) Lower medial part of the arm is supplied by the 
medial cutaneous nerve of the arm (T1, T2) from 
medial cord of the brachial plexus.
(c) Upper lateral half of the arm is supplied by the 
upper lateral cutaneous nerve of the arm from 
axillary nerve.
(d) Lower lateral half of the arm is supplied by the lower 
lateral cutaneous nerve of the arm (C5, C6) from 
radial nerve.
(e) Posterior aspect of the arm is supplied by the 
posterior cutaneous nerve of the arm (C5) from 
radial nerve.
Cutaneous Innervation, 
Venous Drainage and 
Lymphatic Drainage of 
the Upper Limb
CHAPTER
--- Page 99 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
Fig. 7.1 Cutaneous innervation of the upper limb.
Medial cutaneous
nerve of forearm
Posterior cutaneous
nerve of forearm
Lateral cutaneous
nerve of forearm
Upper lateral cutaneous
nerve of arm
Supraclavicular
nerve
Posterior cutaneous
nerve of arm
Superficial branch of
radial nerve
Upper lateral cutaneous
nerve of arm
Lower lateral cutaneous
nerve of arm
Intercostobrachial
nerve
Supraclavicular
nerves (C3, C4)
Lateral cutaneous
nerve of forearm
Median nerve
(cutaneous branches)
Ulnar nerve
(cutaneous branches)
Dorsal branch of
ulnar nerve
Medial cutaneous
nerve of arm
FOREARM (ANTEBRACHIUM)
It is supplied by medial, lateral, and posterior cutaneous 
nerves derived from the medial, lateral, and posterior cords 
of the brachial plexus, respectively.
 
 Medial side of the forearm is supplied by the medial 
cutaneous nerve of the forearm (C8, T1) from the medial 
cord of the brachial plexus. It becomes cutaneous halfway 
down the arm along the basilic vein.
 
 Lateral side of the forearm is supplied by the lateral 
cutaneous nerve of the forearm (C5, C6) from 
musculocutaneous nerve from the lateral cord of the 
brachial 
plexus. 
continuation 
musculocutaneous nerve. It emerges at the lateral border of 
the biceps and divides into anterior and posterior branches.
 
 Posterior side of the forearm is supplied by the posterior 
cutaneous nerve of the forearm (C6, C7, C8) from radial 
nerve, a branch from the posterior cord of the brachial 
plexus. It runs down the posterior aspect of forearm up to 
the wrist.
HAND
1. Palm of the hand
(a) Lateral two-third of the palm is supplied by the 
palmar cutaneous branch of the median nerve.
--- Page 100 ---
Cutaneous Innervation, Venous Drainage and Lymphatic Drainage of the Upper Limb
(b) Medial one-third of the palm is supplied by the 
palmar cutaneous branch of the ulnar nerve.
2. Dorsum of the hand
(a) Lateral two-third of the dorsum of hand is supplied 
by the superficial terminal branch of the radial 
nerve (superficial radial nerve).
(b) Medial one-third of the dorsum of hand is supplied 
by the dorsal branch/posterior cutaneous branch of 
the ulnar nerve.
DIGITS
1. Palmar aspects of the lateral 3½ digits and their dorsal 
aspects up to distal half of the middle phalanges are 
supplied by the digital branches of median nerve.
2. Palmar aspects of the medial 1½ digit and their dorsal 
aspects up to distal half of the middle phalanges by the 
palmar digital branches of the ulnar nerve.
3. Dorsal aspects of the lateral 3½ digits up to proximal 
half of their middle phalanges are supplied by the digital 
branches of the radial nerve.
4. Dorsal aspects of the medial 1½ digit up to their middle 
phalanges are supplied by the digital branches of the 
ulnar nerve.
DERMATOMES OF THE UPPER LIMB 
(Figs 7.2 and 7.3)
As already mentioned, the area of the skin supplied by a 
single spinal nerve is called dermatome.
In the trunk, the arrangement of dermatomes is simple 
(typical) because spinal nerves supplying it do not form 
plexuses and are arranged segmentally. A typical dermatome 
extends on the side of the trunk from the anterior median 
line to the posterior median line.
In the limbs, the arrangement of dermatomes is 
complicated because of the rotation of the limbs during their 
development. It becomes further complicated because spinal 
nerves supplying them form plexuses. (For details, see 
Chapter 5 of Textbook of Clinical Neuroanatomy, 2e by 
Vishram Singh.) During development, before rotation each 
limb has preaxial and postaxial borders with former being 
directed towards the head. The digits along the preaxial 
border are thumb in the upper limb and big toe in the lower 
limb. During rotation of the limbs, the upper limb rotates 
laterally. As a result its preaxial border and thumb lie on the 
lateral side. The lower limb rotates medially. Therefore, its 
preaxial border and big toe lie on the medial side. 
Consequently the dermatomes are arranged consecutively 
downwards on the lateral side of the upper limb and upwards 
on the medial side of the upper limb.
To be very precise, the dermatomes of the upper limb are 
arranged in a numerical sequence as follows:
1. From the shoulder to the thumb, along the preaxial 
border by C3–C6 spinal segments.
2. From the thumb to the little finger by C6–C8 spinal 
segments.
3. From the little finger to the axilla along the postaxial 
border by C8–T2 spinal segments.
The segmental innervation is summarized in Table 7.1.
Fig. 7.2 Arrangement of dermatomes in the developing 
upper limb: A, simple dermatomal pattern to begin with C5 
supplying the preaxial strip and T1 the postaxial strip; 
B, definitive dermatomal pattern of the upper limb bud.
Postaxial
border
Preaxial
border
Dorsal
axial line
Ventral
axial line
Fig. 7.3 Dermatomes of the upper limb: A, anterior aspect; 
B, dorsal aspect.
--- Page 101 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
Table 7.1 Segmental innervations of the upper limb
Area
Segment
Nipple
Tip of the shoulder
Lateral side of the arm
Lateral side of the forearm
Thumb
Hand  middle 3 digits
Little finger
Medial side of the forearm
Medial side of the arm
Axilla
As discussed in the beginning, the understanding of 
dermatomal arrangement is clinically important because the 
physicians commonly test the integrity of spinal cord 
segments from C3 to T2 by performing the sensory 
examination for touch, pain, and temperature. This is so 
because the sensory loss of the skin following injuries to the 
cord conforms to the dermatome.
Clinical correlation
N.B. The students must remember that there is varying 
degrees 
overlapping 
adjacent 
dermatomes. 
Consequently the area of sensory loss following damage to 
the cord segments is always less than the area of distribution 
of the dermatomes.
VENOUS DRAINAGE OF THE UPPER LIMB
The veins draining the upper limb, as elsewhere in the body, 
are divided into two sets/groups (a) superficial and (b) deep.
The superficial veins are located in the superficial fascia 
and are easily accessible. Being easily accessible, they are 
frequently used by the clinicians for drawing blood samples 
or for giving intravenous injections.
The deep veins lie deep to muscles and accompany arteries 
as venae comitantes.
SUPERFICIAL VEINS
Superficial veins have the following general features:
1. The superficial veins lie in the superficial fascia.
2. The superficial veins have a tendency to run away form 
the pressure sites, hence they are absent in the palm, 
along the ulnar border of the forearm, and back of the 
elbow.
3. There are two major superficial veins, one along the 
preaxial border and the other along the postaxial 
border of the limb. The preaxial vein (cephalic vein) is 
longer than the postaxial vein (basilic vein), but the 
postaxial basilic vein drains more efficiently. The load 
of long cephalic vein is greatly relieved as a good 
amount of its blood is transferred to the efficient basilic 
vein by the median cubital vein (communicate 
channel). 
The superficial veins are accompanied by the cutaneous 
nerves and superficial lymphatics.
Superficial veins comprise:
1. Dorsal venous arch
2. Cephalic vein
3. Basilic vein
4. Median cubital vein
Dorsal venous arch (Fig. 7.4): The dorsal venous arch is a 
network of veins on the dorsum of hand. It presents irregular 
arrangement of veins usually with its transverse element, 
which lies 2–3 cm proximal to the heads of metatarsals.
Tributaries
The tributaries of dorsal venous arch are:
1. Three dorsal metacarpal veins.
2. A dorsal digital vein from the medial side of little finger.
3. A dorsal digital vein from the lateral side of index finger.
4. Two dorsal digital veins of the thumb.
5. Veins draining palm of hand. These are (a) veins that 
pass around the margins of the hand and (b) perforating 
veins, which pass dorsally through the interosseous 
spaces.
The dorsal venous arch drains into cephalic and basilic 
veins—the efferent vessels of dorsal venous arch.
N.B. The pressure on the palm during gripping does not 
hamper the venous return of the palm, rather it facilities the 
return because venous blood from the palm is drained into 
dorsal venous arch.
Cephalic vein (Figs 7.4 and 7.5): The cephalic vein begins as 
the continuation of lateral end of the dorsal venous arch.
It crosses the roof of anatomical box, ascends on the 
radial border of the forearm, continues upwards in front of 
elbow along the lateral border of biceps, pierces the deep 
fascia at the lower border of the pectoralis major, runs in 
cleft between the deltoid and pectoralis major (deltopectoral 
groove) up to the infraclavicular fossa, where it pierces the 
clavipectoral fascia and drains into the axillary vein.
--- Page 102 ---
Cutaneous Innervation, Venous Drainage and Lymphatic Drainage of the Upper Limb
N.B.
• Basilic vein is the postaxial vein of the upper limb and 
corresponds to the short saphenous vein of the lower limb.
• About 2.5 cm above the medial epicondyle of humerus, 
it is joined by the median cubital vein.
• It is accompanied by the medial cutaneous nerve of the 
forearm.
Median cubital vein (Fig. 7.5): It is a communicating venous 
channel between the cephalic and basilic veins, which shunts 
blood from the cephalic vein to the basilic vein.
It begins from the cephalic vein, 2.5 cm below the elbow 
bend, runs obliquely upwards and medially to end in the 
basilic vein, 2.5 cm above the bend of elbow.
The important features of median cubital vein are as 
follows:
 
 It is separated from brachial artery by the bicipital 
aponeurosis.
 
 It communicates with the deep veins through a perforator 
vein, which pierces the bicipital aponeurosis.
 
 It receives median vein of the forearm.
 
 It shunts blood from cephalic vein to the basilic vein.
Fig. 7.4 Dorsal venous arch and initial parts of the courses 
of cephalic and basilic veins.
Dorsal digital vein
from medial side of
little finger
Cephalic vein
Basilic vein
Dorsal venous arch
Dorsal digital
veins of thumb
Three dorsal
metacarpal veins
N.B.
• At elbow, greater amount of blood from the cephalic vein 
is shunted into the basilic vein through median cubital 
vein.
• Cephalic vein is accompanied by the lateral cutaneous 
nerve of the forearm.
• An accessory cephalic vein from back of the forearm 
(occasional) ends in the cephalic vein below the elbow.
• Cephalic vein is the preaxial vein of the upper limb and 
corresponds to the great saphenous vein of the lower 
limb.
Basilic vein (Figs 7.4 and 7.5): The basilic vein begins as the 
continuation of the medial end of the dorsal venous arch of 
the hand. It runs upwards along the back of the medial 
border of the forearm, winds round this border near the 
elbow to reach the anterior aspect of the forearm, where it 
continues upwards in front of the elbow along the medial 
side of the biceps brachii up to the middle of the arm, where 
it pierces deep fascia, unites with the brachial veins and runs 
along the medial side of the brachial artery to become 
continuous with the axillary vein at the lower border of the 
teres major.
Fig. 7.5 Cephalic and basilic veins.
Axillary vein
Medial cutaneous
nerve of forearm
Median vein
 of forearm
Lateral cutaneous
nerve of forearm
Median cubital
vein
Basilic vein
Cephalic vein
--- Page 103 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
Median vein of the forearm
Median vein of the forearm begins from palmar venous 
network, runs upwards in the midline on the anterior aspect 
of forearm to end in any one of three veins in front of elbow 
(viz. cephalic, basilic, and median cubital veins).
N.B. Sometimes the upper end of median vein of the 
forearm bifurcates into median cephalic and median basilic 
veins, which join the cephalic and basilic veins, respectively. 
In this situation, the median cubital vein is absent (Fig. 7.6B).
Common venous patterns in front of the elbow (Fig. 7.6)
The veins in front of the elbow commonly form two patterns, 
viz.
1. H-shaped pattern.
2. M-shaped pattern.
Venepuncture in the cubital fossa: The veins in front of 
the elbow, e.g., median cubital vein, cephalic vein, and 
basilic vein are routinely used for giving intravenous 
injections and for withdrawing blood from the donors. The 
median cubital vein is most preferred due to the following 
reasons:
(a) It is the most superficial vein in the body, hence 
access is easy.
(b) It is well supported by the underlying bicipital 
aponeurosis.
(c) It is well anchored to the deep vein by a perforating 
vein, hence it does not slip during procedure.
• The cephalic vein is preferred for hemodialysis in the 
patients with chronic renal failure (CRF), to remove waste 
products from blood.
• The cut-down of cephalic vein in the deltopectoral groove 
is preferred when the superior vena cava infusion is 
necessary.
• The basilic vein is preferred for cardiac catheterization for 
the following reasons:
(a) The diameter of basilic vein increases as it ascends 
from cubital fossa to the axillary vein.
(b) It is in direct line with the axillary vein. To enter the 
right atrium the catheter passes in succession as 
follows:
Basilic vein → axillary vein → subclavian vein → 
brachiocephalic vein → superior vena cava → right atrium 
of the heart.
• The 
cephalic 
vein 
preferred 
cardiac 
catheterization due to the following reasons:
(a) Its diameter does not increase as it ascends.
(b) It joins the axillary vein at a right angle hence it is 
difficult to maneuver the catheter around sharp 
cephaloaxillary angle.
(c) In deltopectoral groove, it frequently divides into small 
branches. One of these branches ascends over the 
clavicle and joins the external jugular vein.
Clinical correlation
DEEP VEINS
The deep veins comprise:
(a) venae comitantes, which accompany the large arteries, 
such as radial, ulnar, and brachial arteries,
(b) venae comitantes of the brachial artery, and
(c) axillary vein.
Venae comitantes of the radial and ulnar arteries 
accompany the radial and ulnar arteries, respectively, and 
join to form the brachial veins.
Venae comitantes are small veins, one on each side of the 
brachial artery. They join axillary vein at the lower border of 
the teres major muscle. The medial one often joins the basilic 
vein.
Axillary vein begins as a continuation of basilic vein at the 
lower border of the teres major muscle and runs through 
axilla, passes through its apex to continue as subclavian vein 
at the outer border of the first rib (for details see Chapter 4, 
page 52).
LYMPHATIC DRAINAGE OF THE 
UPPER LIMB (Fig. 7.7)
The lymphatic drainage of the upper limb follows the 
unnamed lymph vessels, which originate in the hand and 
run upwards towards the axilla. When they reach cubital 
fossa, the lymph passes through cubital nodes. From here 
lymph vessels run superiorly to drain into the axillary lymph 
nodes.
LYMPH VESSELS
The lymph vessels draining the lymph from the upper limb, 
as elsewhere in the body, are divided into two groups: 
superficial and deep.
Fig. 7.6 Common venous patterns in front of the elbow: 
A, H-shaped pattern; B, M-shaped pattern.
Cephalic
vein
Cephalic
vein
Basilic 
vein
Basilic
vein
Median
vein of
forearm
Median 
vein of
forearm
--- Page 104 ---
Cutaneous Innervation, Venous Drainage and Lymphatic Drainage of the Upper Limb
SUPERFICIAL LYMPH VESSELS
The superficial lymph vessels are located in the 
subcutaneous tissue. They are much more numerous than 
the deep lymph vessels. They generally accompany the 
superficial veins.
The superficial lymph vessels drain the lymph from skin 
and subcutaneous tissue. They course upwards towards the 
axilla. Most of them end in the axillary lymph nodes.
Those from lateral side of the limb and lateral two digits
follow the cephalic vein and drain into the infraclavicular 
lymph nodes.
Fig. 7.7 Lymphatic drainage of the upper limb.
Supratrochlear/
epitrochlear node
Deltopectoral
node
Infraclavicular
lymph nodes
Lateral group of
axillary lymph nodes
Those from medial side of the limb and medial three digits 
follow the basilic vein and drain into the lateral group of 
axillary nodes.
Some of the medial lymph vessels terminate in the 
supratrochlear or epitrochlear nodes, which are situated just 
above the medial epicondyle along the basilic vein.
A few lymph vessels drain the thumb end in the 
deltopectoral lymph nodes. The efferents from these nodes 
pierce the clavipectoral fascia to drain in the apical group of 
axillary nodes.
N.B.
• Almost all the superficial lymph vessels of the upper limb 
drain into lateral group of axillary nodes.
• Lymph from palm is drained into the lymph plexus on the 
dorsum of the hand.
• Vertical area of lymph shed is in the middle of the back 
of arm and forearm: The lymph vessels from the back of 
the arm and forearm curve around the medial and lateral 
borders of limb to reach the front of the limb, thus 
forming a vertical area of lymph shed.
DEEP LYMPH VESSELS
The deep lymph vessels are much less numerous than the 
superficial lymph vessels. They drain structures lying deep to 
deep fascia, viz. muscles. The deep lymph vessels course 
along the arteries and drain into the lateral group of the 
axillary lymph nodes.
• Lymphangitis: The inflammation of the lymph vessels is 
termed lymphangitis. It usually follows trivial injuries, e.g., 
cuts and pin-pricks, to any part of the upper limb. In acute 
lymphangitis, the lymph vessels may be seen underneath 
the skin as red streaks, which are tender (i.e., painful to 
touch).
• Lymphedema: The obstruction of lymph vessels may 
cause edema (i.e., swelling) in the area of drainage due to 
accumulation of tissue fluid.
Clinical correlation
LYMPH NODES
The lymph nodes draining the upper limb are divided into 
two groups: (a) superficial and (b) deep.
SUPERFICIAL LYMPH NODES
They lie in the superficial fascia, along the superficial vein. 
These are as follows:
1. Infraclavicular nodes, one or two in number, lie on the 
clavipectoral fascia along the cephalic vein. They drain
--- Page 105 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
lymph from thumb including its web and upper part of 
the breast.
2. Deltopectoral node, lie in the deltopectoral groove 
along the cephalic vein just before it pierces the deep 
fascia. It is thought to be displaced infraclavicular node. 
It drains the lymph from the breast and adjoining small 
structures.
3. Superficial cubital/supratrochlear nodes lie 5 cm above 
the medial epicondyle along the basilic vein. They 
drain the lymph from the ulnar side of the hand and 
forearm.
DEEP LYMPH NODES
The deep lymph nodes are as follows:
1. Axillary lymph nodes are present in the axilla and are 
divided into four sets. These are main lymph nodes of 
the upper limb (for details see Chapter 4, page 53).
2. A few other deep lymph nodes lie on the following sites:
(a) Along the medial side of the brachial artery.
(b) In the cubital fossa, at the bifurcation of the brachial 
artery (called deep cubital node).
(c) Occasionally along the arteries of the forearm.
• The axillary lymph nodes are enlarged (lymphadenopathy) 
and become painful following infection in any part of the 
upper limb.
• In infection affecting the medial side of the hand and forearm, 
supratrochlear lymph node become enlarged and tender.
Clinical correlation
--- Page 107 ---
CHAPTER
The arm is the part of the upper limb between shoulder 
and elbow. The bone of the arm—the humerus articulates 
above with scapula to form shoulder joint and below with 
radius and ulna to form elbow joint. The humerus is almost 
entirely covered by muscles. The primary neurovascular 
bundle of the arm is located on the medial side of the arm, 
hence protected by the limb, which it serves. It consists of 
brachial artery, the basilic vein, and median, ulnar, and 
radial nerves.
SURFACE LANDMARKS
The following bony landmarks and soft tissue structures can 
be felt in the living individual:
1. Greater tubercle of the humerus—can be felt just below 
and lateral to the acromion, deep to deltoid with arm 
lying by the side of the trunk. It forms the most lateral 
bony point of the shoulder region.
2. Shaft of the humerus—can be felt indistinctly in thin 
individuals.
3. Medial epicondyle of the humerus—is the prominent 
bony projection felt on the medial side of the elbow. The 
projection is best seen and felt in midflexed elbow.
4. Lateral epicondyle of the humerus—can be felt in the 
upper part of the depression on the posterolateral aspect 
of the extended elbow.
5. Medial and lateral supracondylar ridges—can be felt in 
the lower one-fourth of the arm as the upward 
continuations of medial and lateral epicondyles, 
respectively.
6. Deltoid muscle—forms the rounded contour of the 
shoulder, which becomes prominent on abducting the 
arm. It covers the upper half of the humerus anteriorly, 
laterally, and posteriorly and its apex (i.e., tendon) is 
attached to the lateral side of the middle of humerus on 
deltoid tuberosity.
7. Biceps muscle—forms a conspicuous bulge on the front 
of arm, which becomes prominent on flexing the elbow. 
Its tendon can be felt on the front of the elbow.
8. Brachial artery pulsations—can be felt in front of the 
elbow just medial to the tendon of biceps muscle.
9. Ulnar nerve—can be rolled by the middle finger in the 
groove behind the medial epicondyle of the humerus.
10. The superficial veins in front of elbow (i.e., cephalic, 
basilic, and median cubital veins)—become visible when 
they are distended by applying tight pressure around the 
arm and then flexing and extending the elbow a few times 
with clenched fist.
11. Head of radius—can be felt in the depression on the 
posterolateral aspect of the elbow just distal to the lateral 
epicondyle. The rotation of the head of radius can be felt 
by supinating and pronating the forearm.
12. Olecranon process of ulna (proximal part of ulna)—is 
readily palpable on the back elbow between the medial 
and the lateral epicondyles.
COMPARTMENTS OF THE ARM (Fig. 8.1)
The deep fascia encloses the arm like a sleeve. The two fascial 
septa, one on the medial side and one on the lateral side 
extend inwards from the fascial sleeve and get attached to the 
medial and lateral supracondylar ridges of the humerus, 
respectively. These septa and fascial sleeve divide the arm 
into 
anterior 
posterior 
compartments. 
Each 
compartment has its own muscles, nerve, and artery.
N.B. Some structures, however, pierce the intermuscular 
septa to shift from one compartment to the other, viz.
• Ulnar nerve and superior ulnar collateral artery pierce the 
medial intermuscular septum to enter the posterior 
compartment.
• Radial nerve and radial collateral artery pierce the lateral 
intermuscular septum to enter the anterior compartment.
--- Page 108 ---
CONTENTS OF THE ANTERIOR COMPARTMENT 
OF THE ARM
 
 Muscles: Biceps brachii, coracobrachialis, and brachialis.
 
 Nerve: Musculocutaneous nerve.
 
 Artery: Brachial artery.
In addition to the above structures, the following large nerves 
also pass through the anterior compartment of arm:
 
 Median nerve.
 
 Ulnar nerve.
 
 Radial nerve.
Muscles
Biceps Brachii (Fig. 8.2)
Origin
The biceps brachii muscle arises from scapula by two heads: 
long and short:
1. Long head arises from supraglenoid tubercle within the 
capsule of shoulder joint. Its tendon runs above the head 
of humerus and emerges from the joint through 
intertubercular sulcus.
2. Short head arises along with coracobrachialis from the tip 
of the coracoid process.
The two heads join together in the distal third of the arm to 
form a belly that ends in a tendon, which gives off the bicipital 
Fig. 8.1 Transverse section of the arm just below the level of insertion of deltoid muscle (H = humerus).
Musculocutaneous nerve
Brachial artery
Median nerve
Basilic vein
Medial head
Lateral head
Long head
Ulnar nerve
Med. intermuscular
septum
Radial nerve
of triceps brachii
Brachialis
Deep fascia
Cephalic vein
Biceps brachii
Profunda
brachii artery
Skin
Superficial fascia
aponeurosis from its medial aspect, opposite the bend of 
elbow.
Insertion
The biceps muscle is inserted into:
(a) the posterior part of the radial tuberosity by its tendon. 
A bursa intervenes between the tendon and anterior part 
of the tuberosity, and
(b) the deep fascia on the medial aspect of forearm by its 
aponeurosis (bicipital aponeurosis). The aponeurosis 
protects the underlying brachial artery and median 
nerve.
Nerve supply
By musculocutaneous nerve (C5, C6, and C7).
Actions
1. It is strong supinator of the forearm, when elbow is 
flexed. This action is used in screwing movements such 
as tightening the screw with screw driver.
2. It is a powerful flexor of the forearm, when elbow is 
extended.
3. It is also a weak flexor of the shoulder joint.
Clinical testing
The biceps brachii is tested by asking the patient to flex the 
elbow against resistance when the forearm is supinated. In 
this act, the muscle forms a prominent bulge on the front of 
the arm.
--- Page 109 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
Biceps reflex: It is tested during physical examination by 
tapping the tendon of biceps brachii by reflex hammer with 
forearm pronated and partially extended at elbow. The 
normal reflex is brief jerk-like flexion of the elbow. The 
normal reflex confirms the integrity of musculocutaneous 
nerve and C5 and C6 spinal segments.
Clinical correlation
Coracobrachialis (Fig. 8.3)
Origin
From the tip of coracoid process of the scapula along with 
short head of the biceps brachii.
Insertion
Into the middle of the medial border of the shaft of the 
humerus.
Nerve supply
By musculocutaneous nerve.
Actions
It is a weak flexor and adductor of the arm.
N.B.
• Morphology of the coracobrachialis: It represents the 
muscle of medial compartment of the forelimb of 
quadrupeds, which is not well-developed in human 
beings. In some animals, this muscle consists of three 
heads. In human beings, the upper two heads are fused 
and musculocutaneous nerve passes between the two 
fused heads. The lower third head has disappeared in 
humans. But, occasionally the lower head persists as a 
fibrous band (ligament of Struthers), which extends 
between supratrochlear/trochlear spur and medial 
epicondyle of the humerus (Fig. 2.10). The median nerve 
and brachial artery then pass deep to the ligament and 
may be compressed.
Fig. 8.2 Origin and insertion of the biceps brachii.
Bicipital
aponeurosis
Tendon of
biceps
Origin
1. Short head from tip of
coracoid process
2. Long head from
 supraglenoid
 tubercle of scapula
Insertion
Posterior part of
radial tuberosity
BICEPS BRACHII
Fig. 8.3 Origin and insertion of the coracobrachialis.
Insertion
Middle (5 cm) of the
medial border of
humerus
Origin
Tip of coracoid
process in common
with the short head of
biceps brachii 
Short head of
biceps brachii
CORACOBRACHIALIS
--- Page 112 ---
the level of neck of radius by dividing into radial and ulnar 
arteries.
Relations
Anteriorly 
– In the upper part, it is related to medial 
cutaneous nerve of the forearm, which lies in 
front of it.
 
– In the middle part, it is crossed by the median 
nerve from lateral to medial side.
 
– In the lower part, in the cubital fossa, it is 
crossed by the bicipital aponeurosis.
Posteriorly 
 From above downwards, the brachial artery lies 
successively on long head of triceps, medial 
head of triceps, coracobrachialis, and brachialis 
muscles.
Medially 
 The ulnar nerve and basilic vein in the upper 
part of the arm; and median nerve in the lower 
part of the arm. 
Laterally 
 The median nerve, coracobrachialis, and biceps 
in the upper part of arm and tendon of biceps 
in the lower part.
N.B. The brachial artery is superficial throughout its course, 
being covered only by the skin and fasciae, hence easily 
accessible.
Branches
1. Muscular branches to the muscles of the anterior 
compartment of the arm.
2. Profunda brachii artery (largest and first branch). It 
arises from the posteromedial aspect of the brachial 
artery just below the lower border of the teres major. It 
accompanies the radial nerve with which it immediately 
leaves the lower triangular intermuscular space to enter 
the spiral groove on the posterior surface of the 
humerus.
3. Nutrient artery to humerus enters the nutrient foramen 
of humerus located near the insertion of coracobrachialis.
4. Superior ulnar collateral artery arises near the middle 
of the arm and accompanies the ulnar nerve.
5. Inferior ulnar collateral (or supratrochlear artery) 
arises near the lower end of humerus and divides into 
the anterior and posterior branches, which take part in 
the formation of arterial anastomosis around the 
elbow.
6. Radial and ulnar arteries (terminal branches).
• Brachial pulse: The brachial pulse is commonly felt in 
the cubital fossa medial to the tendon of biceps and its 
pulsations are auscultated for recording the blood 
pressure. The biceps tendon is easily palpable on flexing 
the elbow.
Clinical correlation
Fig. 8.7 Brachial artery.
Deltoid/ascending
branch 
(anastomotic
branch)
Nutrient artery
Profunda
brachii artery
Brachial artery
Superior ulnar
collateral artery
Inferior ulnar
collateral artery
Ulnar artery
(large terminal branch)
Neck of radius
Radial artery
(small terminal branch)
Teres major
muscle
Posterior 
descending branch
(radial collateral artery)
Muscular branch
Anterior
descending branch
(middle collateral artery)
Axillary artery
Fig. 8.8 Compression of the brachial artery against humerus.
Brachial artery
Axillary artery
Humerus
Teres major
Site of compression of
brachial artery
Ulnar artery
Radial artery
Insertion of 
coracobrachialis
--- Page 113 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
• Compression of brachial artery: The brachial artery can 
be effectively compressed against the shaft of humerus at 
the level of insertion of coracobrachialis to stop the 
hemorrhages in the upper limb occurring from any artery 
distal to the brachial artery, e.g., bleeding wounds of the 
palmar arterial arches (Fig. 8.8).
• Rupture of the brachial artery in supracondylar 
fracture of the humerus may lead to Volkmann’s ischemic 
contracture (Fig. 8.9). For details see Chapter 9, p. 114. 
Arterial Anastomosis around the Elbow (Fig. 8.10)
The arterial anastomosis around the elbow takes place 
between the branches of brachial artery and those from the 
upper ends of radial and ulnar arteries.
For easy remembering, the anastomosis is divided into the 
following parts:
1. In front of the medial epicondyle:
(a) Inferior ulnar collateral artery and branch from the 
superior ulnar collateral artery (branches of the 
brachial artery), anastomose with
(b) Anterior ulnar recurrent artery (branch of the ulnar 
artery).
2. Behind the medial epicondyle:
(a) Superior ulnar collateral artery and a branch from 
the inferior ulnar collateral artery (branches of 
brachial artery), anastomose with
(b) Posterior ulnar recurrent artery (branch of the ulnar 
artery).
3. In front of lateral epicondyle:
(a) Radial collateral artery (branch of the profunda 
brachii artery), anastomose with
(b) Radial recurrent artery (branch of the radial artery).
4. Behind the lateral epicondyle:
(a) Posterior descending artery (branch of the profunda 
brachii artery), anastomose with
(b) Interosseous recurrent artery (branch of the posterior 
interosseous artery); and a branch of common 
interosseous artery (a branch of the ulnar artery).
5. Above the olecranon fossa:
(a) Middle collateral artery (branch of the profunda 
brachii artery), anastomose with
(b) Transverse branch from the posterior division of the 
inferior ulnar collateral artery.
Large Nerves Passing Through the Arm
These are median, ulnar, and radial nerves: 
Median Nerve
The median nerve arises from the lateral and medial cords 
of the brachial plexus in axilla. It is closely related to the 
brachial artery throughout its course in the arm. Therefore, 
it is like the brachial artery, it is superficially located except 
at elbow where it is crossed by the bicipital aponeurosis.
The relationship of median nerve with the brachial artery 
in the arm is as under (Fig. 8.11):
1. In the upper part, it is lateral to the artery. 
2. In the middle part, it crosses in front of the artery from 
lateral to medial side.
3. In the lower part, it is medial to the artery up to elbow.
Branches
In the arm, the median nerve gives rise to the following 
branches:
1. Nerve to pronator teres just above the elbow.
2. Vasomotor nerve to the brachial artery.
3. Articular branch to the elbow joint at or just below the 
elbow.
Fig. 8.9 Rupture of the brachial artery in supracondylar 
fracture of the humerus.
Brachial artery
Rupture of
brachial artery
Supracondylar
fracture of humerus
Ulna
Humerus
Fig. 8.10 Arterial anastomosis around the elbow joint 
(L  lateral epicondyle, M  medial epicondyle).
Profunda brachii
artery
Superior ulnar
collateral
Inferior ulnar
collateral
Arteries
Posterior
ulnar recurrent
Anterior ulnar
recurrent
Common
interosseous artery
Ulnar artery
Anterior
interosseous artery
Posterior
interosseous artery
Interosseous
recurrent
artery
Radial
recurrent
artery
Anterior
descending
branch
Radial
artery
Posterior
descending
branch
Brachial
artery
Arteries
--- Page 114 ---
Ulnar Nerve
The ulnar nerve arises from medial cord of the brachial 
plexus in the axilla. It then runs downwards on the medial 
side of the arm medial to the brachial artery up to the 
insertion of coracobrachialis. Here it pierces the medial 
intermuscular septum along with the superior ulnar 
collateral artery to enter the posterior compartment of the 
arm. At the elbow, the ulnar nerve passes behind the medial 
epicondyle of humerus where it can be easily palpated. The 
ulnar nerve does not give any branch in the arm.
Radial Nerve (Fig. 8.12)
Origin and course
The radial nerve arises from the posterior cord of the brachial 
plexus in the axilla. In the arm the nerve first lies posterior to 
the brachial artery. Then it winds around the back of the arm to 
enter the radial/spiral groove of humerus between the lateral 
and medial heads of the triceps; where it is accompanied by 
profunda brachii artery. At the lower end of the spiral groove, 
it pierces lateral intermuscular septum and enters the 
anterior compartment of the arm. Here it continues 
downward in front of the elbow in the cubital fossa, between 
the brachialis and brachioradialis muscles. Then at a variable 
point it divides into two terminal branches: (a) a sensory 
branch, the superficial radial nerve, and (b) a motor branch, 
the deep radial nerve. The latter disappears into the substance 
of supinator muscle just below the elbow.
Branches
1. In the axilla:
(a) Nerves to long and medial heads of triceps.
(b) Posterior cutaneous nerve of the arm.
2. In the spiral groove:
(a) Nerves to lateral and medial heads of triceps.
(b) Nerve to anconeus.
(c) Lower lateral cutaneous nerve of the arm.
(d) Posterior cutaneous nerve of forearm.
3. In the anterior compartment of the arm:
(a) Nerves to brachialis, brachioradialis, and extensor 
carpi radialis longus.
(b) Articular branches to the elbow joint.
(c) Deep radial nerve.
(d) Superficial radial nerve.
Fig. 8.11 Relations of the median nerve with the brachial 
artery in arm. The course of the radial and ulnar nerves in 
the arm is also shown.
Teres major
Ulnar nerve
Medial intermuscular
septum
Ulnar nerve
Bicipital aponeurosis
Ulnar artery
Median nerve
Brachial artery
Radial nerve
Lateral intermuscular
septum
Radial artery
Fig. 8.12 Course, relations, and branches of the radial 
nerve in the arm.
Nerve to lateral
head of triceps
Lateral head of
triceps
Lower lateral cutaneous
nerve of arm
Posterior cutaneous
nerve of forearm
Anconeus
Radial nerve
Nerve to long
head of triceps
Long head
of triceps
Posterior cutaneous
nerve of arm
Nerves to medial
head of triceps
Nerves to anconeus
--- Page 115 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
CUBITAL FOSSA (Fig. 8.13)
The cubital fossa is a triangular hollow in front of the elbow. 
It corresponds (i.e., homologous) to the popliteal fossa of the 
lower limb.
Boundaries
Lateral: Medial border of brachioradialis muscle.
Medial: Lateral border of pronator teres muscle.
Base: 
 An imaginary horizontal line, joining the front of 
two epicondyles of the humerus.
Apex: 
 Meeting point of the lateral and medial boundaries. 
Here brachioradialis overlaps the pronator teres.
Floor: 
 It is formed by two muscles, brachialis in the upper 
part and supinator in the lower part (Fig. 8.14).
Roof: 
It is formed from superficial to deep by (Fig. 8.15):
Fig. 8.13 Boundaries and contents of the cubital fossa.
Origin of
brachioradialis
Base of
cubital fossa
Brachioradialis
Pronator teres
Common flexor origin
3. Tendon of biceps
2. Brachial artery
1. Median nerve
Contents of cubital fossa
(From medial to lateral side)
4. Radial nerve
 
(superficial branch)
Fig. 8.14 Muscles forming the floor of cubital fossa: A, anterior view; B, cross-sectional view.
Supinator
Supinator
Radial
tuberosity
Brachialis 
Radius
Brachialis
Ulna
--- Page 117 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
Insertion
The common tendon is inserted into the posterior part of 
the superior surface of the olecranon process of ulna.
N.B. A few fibres of deep head are inserted into the 
posterior aspect of the capsule of elbow joint and are 
referred to as articularis cubiti or subanconeus muscle. 
These fibres prevent the nipping of the capsule during 
extension of the arm.
Nerve supply
By radial nerve (C7, C8). Each head receives a separate 
branch from radial nerve in the following manner:
Insertion
Posterior part
of the superior
surface of the
olecranon process
Origin of medial
head from:
Posterior surface
of humerus below
the radial groove 
Origin of long head from:
Infraglenoid tubercle
of scapula
Origin of lateral
head from:
Oblique ridge on
the posterior aspect
of humerus
Profunda brachii
artery and radial
nerve
TRICEPS
Fig. 8.16 Origin and insertion of the triceps brachii.
 
 Nerve to long head arises from the radial nerve in axilla.
 
 Nerve to lateral head arises from the radial nerve in the 
radial groove.
 
 Nerve to medial head arises from the radial nerve in the 
radial groove.
Actions
The triceps brachii is the powerful extensor of the elbow 
joint. The long head supports the head of humerus during 
hyperabduction of the arm.
Injury of radial nerve in radial groove: If the radial nerve 
is damaged in the radial groove, the extension of elbow and 
triceps reflex is not lost because nerve to long head arises 
from the radial nerve in axilla.
Clinical correlation
Radial Nerve
It is described on page 99.
Profunda Brachii Artery (Deep Artery of the 
Arm, Fig. 8.17)
The profunda brachii artery is the largest branch of the 
brachial artery. It arises from the posterolateral aspect of the 
brachial artery just below the teres major. It accompanies the 
radial nerve through the radial groove and then terminates 
by dividing into anterior and posterior descending branches, 
which take part in the arterial anastomosis around the elbow 
joint.
Fig. 8.17 Branches of the profunda brachii artery.
Teres major
Profunda brachii
artery
Muscular branches
Ant. descending branch
(radial collateral artery)
Post. descending branch
(middle collateral artery)
Brachial artery
Deltoid branch
Nutrient branch
to humerus
Radial
recurrent artery
Interosseous recurrent artery
--- Page 118 ---
Branches
1. Deltoid (ascending) branch: It ascends between long and 
lateral heads of triceps and anastomoses with the descend-
ing branch of the posterior circumflex humeral artery.
2. Nutrient artery to humerus: It enters the shaft of humerus 
in the radial groove, just behind the deltoid tuberosity.
3. Anterior descending (radial collateral) artery: It is 
the smaller terminal branch, which accompanies the 
radial nerve and anastomoses with the radial recurrent 
artery in front of the lateral epicondyle of the 
humerus.
4. Posterior descending (middle collateral) artery: It is 
the larger terminal branch of the profunda brachii 
artery, which descends behind the shaft of humerus 
and anastomoses with the interosseous recurrent artery 
behind the lateral epicondyle of the humerus.
--- Page 119 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
Golden Facts to Remember
  Most lateral bony point of the shoulder region
Greater tubercle of the humerus
  Workhorse of the forearm flexion
Brachialis muscle
  Most felt arterial pulse for recording blood 
pressure
Brachial pulse in the cubital fossa
  Best place to compress the brachial artery to stop 
hemorrhage in the arm and hand
Medial aspect of humerus near the middle of arm 
(site of insertion of coracobrachialis)
  Largest branch of the brachial artery
Profunda brachii artery
  Neurovascular structures jeopardized in midshaft 
fracture of the humerus
Radial nerve and profunda brachii artery
  Most preferred vein for venepuncture in the upper 
limb
Median cubital vein
  Damage of the radial nerve in spiral groove 
causes only weakness in extension of elbow and 
not the total inability to extend elbow
Because branches of the radial nerve supplying 
long and medial heads of triceps arise in axilla, i.e., 
above radial groove
  Ligament of Struthers
Fibrous band extending between the supratrochlear 
spur and medial epicondyle of humerus
  Workhorse of the forearm extension
Medial head of triceps
A 45-year-old weight lifter while lifting the heavy 
weight in weight lifting competition suddenly felt a 
sudden snap and severe pain in his shoulder region. He 
dropped the weight and left the platform. He was taken 
to the hospital for check up. On examination the doctor 
noticed a ball-like bulge near the centre of the distal 
part of the anterior aspect of the arm. The patient was 
not able to supinate his arm and his forearm was 
pronated and flexed. A diagnosis of rupture of tendon 
of long head of biceps was made.
Questions
1. What are the causes of rupture of tendon of long 
head of biceps and which age group does it mostly 
affect?
2. What is origin of long and short heads of the biceps 
brachii?
3. What caused the ball-like bulge in the front of the 
arm and name this deformity?
Answers
1. (a) Rupture of tendon long head of biceps usually 
occurs from wear and tear of an inflamed tendon 
as it moves back and forth in the bicipital groove 
of the humerus. It may also result from forceful 
flexion of arm against excessive resistance as 
during weight lifting.
(b) It usually occurs in individuals >35 years of 
age.
2. (a) Long head from the supraglenoid tubercle of 
the scapula.
(b) Short head from the tip of coracoid process of 
the scapula.
3. (a) Detached belly of the biceps muscle.
(b) Popeye deformity.
Clinical Case Study
--- Page 120 ---
Forearm
CHAPTER
The forearm extends from the elbow to the wrist and 
contains two bones, which are tied together by the thin 
strong fibrous membrane—the interosseous membrane. The 
head of radius is at the proximal end of the forearm whereas 
the head of ulna is at the distal end of the forearm. The radius 
and ulna at both their ends articulate with each other to 
form the superior and inferior radio-ulnar joints. All 
important movements of supination and pronation of the 
forearm occur at these joints. The upper ends of radius and 
ulna articulate with the lower end of humerus to form elbow 
joint. The main purpose of the movements of the forearm at 
elbow and radio-ulnar joints is to place the hand at the desired 
place. The muscles, nerves, and vessels are present both on 
the front and back of the forearm.
Surface Landmarks
A. On the Front of Forearm
1. Medial and lateral epicondyles of the humerus can be 
easily felt at the elbow; the medial epicondyle is more 
prominent than the lateral epicondyle. The ulnar nerve 
can be rolled behind the medial epicondyle (also see 
page 93).
2. Tendon of biceps brachii can be easily palpated in front 
of the elbow. The pulsations of the brachial artery can be 
felt just medial to the tendon.
3. Head of radius and olecranon process of the ulna have 
been described on page 97.
B. On the Back of Forearm
1. Olecranon process of the ulna is the most prominent 
bony elevation on the back of the elbow in the midline. 
In an extended elbow, the tip of olecranon process lies in 
a horizontal line with two epicondyles of the humerus 
and in flexed elbow the three points when joined, form 
an equilateral triangle. 
2. Posterior border of the ulna is subcutaneous throughout 
its length. It can be felt in the longitudinal furrow on the 
back of forearm with elbow flexed. It separates the flexor 
and extensor muscles of the forearm.
3. Styloid processes of the radius and ulna can be easily 
felt on the lateral and medial sides of the wrist, respec-
tively. The styloid process of radius is located about 1.25 
cm more distally.
4. Dorsal tubercle of the radius (Lister’s tubercle) can be 
palpated on the posterior aspect of the distal end of the 
radius in line with the cleft between index and middle 
fingers.
FASCIAL COMPARTMENTS OF THE FOREARM
The forearm is enclosed in sheath of deep fascia of the forearm 
(antebrachial fascia). It is attached to the posterior 
subcutaneous border of the ulna. From the deep surface fascia, 
septa pass between the muscles and some of these septa reach 
the bone.
This deep fascia, together with interosseous membrane 
and fibrous intermuscular septa divide the forearm into 
several compartments, each having its own muscles, nerves, 
and blood supply. Classically, the forearm is divided into 
the two compartments: (a) anterior compartment and 
(b) posterior compartment (Fig. 9.1).
The anterior compartment contains the structures on the 
front of the forearm and the posterior compartment contains 
the structure on the back of the forearm.
Near the wrist, the deep fascia presents two localized 
thickenings, the flexor and the extensor retinacula, which 
retain the digital tendons in position during hand movements.
Flexor Retinaculum (Fig. 9.2)
The flexor retinaculum is a strong fibrous band formed by 
the thickening of deep fascia in front of the carpus 
(anatomical wrist). It is rectangular in shape and has roughly 
the size and shape of a postage stamp. Like a postage stamp, 
it presents two surfaces and four borders. Medially it is 
attached to the pisiform and the hook of the hamate whereas 
laterally it is attached to the tubercle of scaphoid and crest of 
the trapezium. With carpus, it forms an osseofibrous tunnel 
called carpal tunnel for the passage of flexor tendons of the
--- Page 121 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
digits. The flexor retinaculum is described in detail in 
Chapter 11, page 139.
FRONT OF THE FOREARM
The following muscles, vessels, and nerves are to be studied 
on the front of the forearm:
1. Muscles: Eight muscles, arranged in two groups.
2. Arteries: Two arteries, radial and ulnar.
3. Nerves: Three nerves, median, ulnar, and radial.
MUSCLES OF THE FRONT OF THE FOREARM
The muscles of the forearm are generally divided into two 
groups: superficial and deep.
Superficial Muscles of Front of Forearm (Fig. 9.3)
This group comprises five muscles. From lateral to medial 
side, these are:
1. Pronator teres.
2. Flexor carpi radialis.
3. Palmaris longus.
4. Flexor digitorum superficialis.
5. Flexor carpi ulnaris.
All these muscles are flexor of the forearm and have a 
common origin—from the front of the medial epicondyle of 
the humerus called common flexor origin.
Pronator Teres (Fig. 9.4)
Pronator teres is smallest and most lateral of the superficial 
flexors of the forearm. It forms the medial boundary of the 
cubital fossa.
Origin
It arises by two heads (a) superficial (humeral) head from the 
medial epicondyle of the humerus, and (b) deep (ulnar) 
head from the medial margin of the coronoid process of the 
ulna.
Insertion
Into the rough impression on the middle one-third of the 
lateral surface (most convex part) of the radius.
Nerve supply
By the median nerve.
Fig. 9.1 Fascial compartments of the forearm. Cross section through the upper third of the forearm.
Supinator
Extensor carpi
ulnaris
Extensor digiti minimi
Extensor digitorum
Radius
Extensor carpi 
radialis longus
Extensor carpi
radialis brevis
Brachioradialis
Pronator teres
Palmaris longus
Flexor digitorum
superficialis
Flexor carpi ulnaris
Flexor digitorum
profundus
Ulna
Posterior
interosseous
nerve
Interosseous
membrane
Median nerve
Flexor carpi radialis
Ulnar nerve
Fig. 9.2 Flexor retinaculum. (Source: Fig. 4.1, Page 33, 
Selective Anatomy Prep Manual for Undergraduates, Vol. I, 
Vishram Singh. Copyright Elsevier 2015, All rights reserved.)
Pisiform bone
Hook of hamate
Flexor retinaculum
Tubercle of
scaphoid
Crest of
trapezium
Ulna
Radius
--- Page 122 ---
Forearm
Actions
It is the main pronator of the forearm. It also helps in the 
flexion of elbow.
Clinical testing
The pronator teres is tested by asking the patient to pronate 
the forearm from supine position against resistance with 
elbow flexed.
N.B.
• Median nerve passes between the two heads of pronator 
teres.
• Ulnar artery passes deep to the deep head of pronator 
teres, thus ulnar artery is separated from the median 
nerve by the deep head of pronator teres in the region of 
cubital fossa.
Flexor Carpi Radialis (Fig. 9.5)
Origin
From the medial epicondyle of humerus by a common flexor 
origin.
Insertion
On to the anterior aspects of the bases of second and third 
metacarpals.
Nerve supply
By the median nerve.
Actions
1. Acting with flexor carpi ulnaris, it flexes the wrist.
2. Acting with brachioradialis, it abducts the wrist.
Fig. 9.3 Superficial muscles of the front of the forearm.
Common flexor origin
1. Pronator teres
2. Flexor carpi radialis
3. Palmaris longus
4. Flexor digitorum
superficialis
Flexor retinaculum
5. Flexor carpi ulnaris 
Pisiform bone
Palmar aponeurosis
Fig. 9.4 Origin and insertion of the pronator teres.
PRONATOR TERES
Origin
1. Superficial (humeral) head from
 medial epicondyle of humerus
2. Deep (ulnar) head from 
 
medial margin of
 
coronoid process of ulna
Insertion
Middle 1/3rd of 
lateral surface of radius
--- Page 123 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
Fig. 9.6 Origin and insertion of the flexor carpi ulnaris.
Origin
• Humeral head from:
 Medial epicondyle of humerus
• Ulnar head from:
 1. Medial margin of olecranon
 
process
 2. Upper 2/3rd of posterior
 
border of ulna by
 
an aponeurosis
FLEXOR CARPI ULNARIS
Insertion
Pisiform bone
Pisohamate ligament
Pisometacarpal ligament
N.B. The tendon of flexor carpi radialis (FCR) is a good guide 
to the radial artery, which lies just lateral to it at the wrist.
Palmaris Longus
Origin
From the medial epicondyle of humerus by a common flexor 
origin.
Insertion
Its long cord-like tendon crosses superficial to the flexor 
retinaculum and attaches to its distal part and joins the apex 
of palmar aponeurosis.
Nerve supply 
By the median nerve.
Actions
It flexes the wrist and makes the palmar aponeuroses tense.
N.B.
• Morphologically, palmaris longus is a degenerating 
muscle with small short belly and a long tendon. The 
palmar aponeurosis represents the distal part of the tendon 
of palmaris longus. The palmaris longus corresponds to 
the plantaris muscle on the back of the leg.
• It is absent on one or both sides (usually on the left) in 
approximately 10% of people, but its actions are not 
missed. Hence, its tendon is often used by the surgeons 
for tendon grafting.
Flexor Carpi Ulnaris (Fig. 9.6)
The flexor carpi ulnaris (FCU) is most medial of the 
superficial flexors of the forearm.
Fig. 9.5 Origin and insertion of the flexor carpi radialis.
FLEXOR CARPI RADIALIS 
Insertion
Bases of 2nd and 3rd
metacarpals
Origin
Medial epicondyle of humerus
by a common flexor origin
--- Page 124 ---
Forearm
Origin
It arises by two heads: a small humeral head and a large ulnar 
head.
(a) humeral head from the medial epicondyle of the 
humerus by a common flexor origin, and 
(b) ulnar head from the medial margin of the olecranon 
process and by an aponeurosis from the upper two-third 
of the posterior border of the ulna.
Insertion
Into (a) pisiform bone and (b) hook of hamate and the base 
of fifth metacarpal bone (through pisohamate and 
pisometacarpal ligaments, respectively). The latter is the true 
insertion because a sesamoid bone (pisiform) develops in its 
tendon.
Nerve supply
By the ulnar nerve.
Actions 
1. Acting with the extensor carpi ulnaris, it adducts the 
wrist joint.
2. Acting with the flexor carpi radialis, it flexes the wrist 
joint.
N.B.
• The ulnar nerve enters the forearm by passing between 
the two heads of flexor carpi ulnaris, which are connected 
to each other by a tendinous arch.
• The tendon of flexor carpi ulnaris is a good guide to ulnar 
nerve and ulnar artery, which lie on its lateral side at the 
wrist.
Flexor Digitorum Superficialis (sublimis; Fig. 9.7)
The flexor digitorum superficialis (FDS) is the largest muscle 
of the superficial group of muscles on the front of the 
forearm. Actually speaking, it forms the intermediate muscle 
layer between the superficial and deep groups of the forearm 
muscles.
Origin
It arises by two heads:
(a) humero-ulnar head, from the medial epicondyle of 
humerus, sublime tubercle on the medial margin of the 
coronoid process of ulna and medial (ulnar) collateral 
ligament of the elbow joint,
(b) radial head, from the anterior oblique line of the radius, 
extending from the radial tuberosity to the insertion of 
pronator teres (upper half of the anterior border of 
radius).
Insertion 
Middle phalanges of medial four fingers. The mode of 
insertion is as follows. The muscles splits into two layers: 
superficial and deep. The superficial layer forms two 
tendons, which are inserted into middle phalanges of 
middle and ring fingers. The deep layer also forms two 
tendons, which are inserted into middle phalanges index 
and little fingers. Before insertion each of the four tendons 
splits, opposite the proximal phalanx, into medial and 
Fig. 9.7 Origin and insertion of the flexor digitorum 
superficialis.
Origin
Radial head
Anterior oblique line of
radius
1. Medial epicondyle of
 humerus 
2. Medial collateral
 
ligament
3. Medial margin of
 
coronoid process
Insertion
Middle phalanges of
fingers
FLEXOR DIGITORUM
SUPERFICIALIS
Ulnar artery
Tendinous arch
joining two heads
Median nerve
Origin
Humero-ulnar head
--- Page 125 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
lateral slips, which are inserted into the corresponding 
sides of the middle phalanx.
Nerve supply 
By the median nerve.
Actions 
Flexor 
digitorum 
superficialis 
flexes 
proximal 
interphalangeal (PIP) joints of the medial four digits. Acting 
more strongly, it also helps in flexion of the proximal 
phalanges and wrist joint.
N.B.
• The median nerve and ulnar artery pass downwards deep 
to the fibrous arch/tendinous arch connecting the 
humero-ulnar and radial heads of FDS.
• The four tendons of FDS pass deep to flexor retinaculum 
enclosed within a common synovial sheath, the ulnar 
bursa.
Deep Muscles of the Front of the Forearm
There are three deep muscles of the front of the forearm, viz.
1. Flexor pollicis longus (placed laterally).
2. Flexor digitorum profundus (placed medially).
3. Pronator quadratus (placed distally).
Flexor Digitorum Profundus (Fig. 9.8)
The flexor digitorum profundus (FDP) is the most bulky and 
powerful muscle on the front of forearm and provides main 
gripping power to the hand.
Origin
1. From upper three-fourth of the anterior and medial 
surfaces of the shaft of ulna and adjacent medial half of 
the interosseous membrane.
2. By an aponeurosis from upper three-fourth of the 
posterior border of ulna along with flexor and extensor 
carpi ulnaris muscles.
3. From the medial side of olecranon and coronoid process 
of ulna.
Insertion 
On to the palmar aspect of the bases of distal phalanges of 
medial four digits. The actual mode of insertion is as follows: 
the muscle forms four tendons, which enter the palm by 
passing deep to the flexor retinaculum. Opposite the proximal 
phalanx of corresponding digit, the tendon perforates the 
tendon of flexor digitorum superficialis and passes forward to 
be inserted in palmar surface of the distal phalanx.
Nerve supply
1. Medial half by the ulnar nerve.
2. Lateral half by the anterior interosseous nerve – a branch 
of the median nerve.
Actions
FDP flexes the distal interphalangeal (DIP) joints of medial 
four digits. It also helps to flex the wrist joint.
N.B.
Flexor digitorum profundus—
(a) is most powerful and bulky muscle of the forearm,
(b) has dual innervation by median and ulnar nerves,
(c) provides most of the gripping power to hand,
(d) forms four tendons which enter the hand by passing 
deep to flexor retinaculum, posterior to the tendons of 
FDS in a common synovial sheath—ulnar bursa,
(e) forms most of the surface elevation medial to the 
palpable posterior border of the ulna, and
provides origin to the lumbrical muscles in the palm.
Clinical testing
The flexor digitorum profundus is tested by asking the 
patient to flex the DIP joint, while holding the PIP joint in 
extension.
The integrity of the median nerve in forearm is tested in 
this way by using index finger and that of ulnar nerve by 
using little finger.
Flexor Pollicis Longus (Fig. 9.8)
The flexor pollicis longus lies lateral to the FDP and clothes 
the anterior aspect of the radius distal to the attachment of 
supinator muscle.
Origin
From upper two-third of the anterior surface of the radius 
below the anterior oblique line and adjoining part of the 
interosseous membrane.
Insertion
Into the anterior surface of the base of distal phalanx of the 
thumb.
Actions
It primarily flexes the distal phalanx of the thumb but 
secondarily it also flexes proximal phalanx and first 
metacarpal 
metacarpophalangeal 
(MP) 
carpometacarpal (CM) joints respectively.
N.B.
• The anterior interosseous nerve and vessels descend on 
interosseous membrane between flexor pollicis longus 
and flexor digitorum profundus.
• The flexor pollicis longus is the only muscle, which flexes 
the interphalangeal joints of the thumb.
--- Page 126 ---
Forearm
Clinical testing
The flexor pollicis longus is tested by asking the patient to 
flex the interphalangeal joint of the thumb, while proximal 
phalanx of the thumb is held in extension.
Pronator Quadratus (Fig. 9.9)
It is a flat quadrilateral muscle, which extends across the 
front of the distal parts of the radius and ulna.
Origin
Upper 2/3rd of anterior surface of
radius below the oblique line and
adjoining part of interosseous membrane
Insertion
Base of distal
phalanx of thumb
Insertion
Bases of distal
phalanges of fingers
FLEXOR POLLICIS LONGUS
FLEXOR DIGITORUM PROFUNDUS
1. Medial side of the olecranon and
 coronoid processes of ulna
2. Upper 3/4th of anterior and medial
 surfaces of shaft of ulna and adjoining
 part of interosseous membrane
3. Upper 3/4th of the
 posterior border of ulna
Origin
Fig. 9.8 Origin and insertion of the flexor digitorum profundus and flexor pollicis longus.
--- Page 127 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
Origin
From an oblique ridge on the lower one-fourth of the anterior 
surface of the shaft of ulna and medial part of this surface.
Insertion
1. The superficial fibres into the distal one-fourth of the 
anterior border and anterior surface of the shaft of radius.
2. The deeper fibres into the triangular area above the 
ulnar notch of the radius.
Nerve supply 
By anterior interosseous nerve.
Actions 
Pronator quadratus is the chief pronator of the forearm and 
is assisted by pronator teres only in rapid and forceful 
pronation.
ARTERIES OF THE FRONT OF THE FOREARM 
(Fig. 9.10)
The arteries of the front of the forearm are ulnar and radial 
arteries. They mainly supply blood to the hand through 
superficial and deep palmar arterial arches.
The blood supply to the forearm is mainly derived from 
the anterior and posterior interosseous arteries, the terminal 
branches of the common interosseous artery, a branch of the 
ulnar artery.
Ulnar Artery
Course
The ulnar artery is the larger terminal branch of the brachial 
artery. It begins in the cubital fossa at the level of the neck of 
the radius (or 1 cm distal to the flexion crease of the elbow). 
It runs downwards and reaches the medial side of the forearm 
midway between the elbow and wrist. In the upper one-third 
of forearm, the course is oblique (i.e., downwards and 
medially) but in lower two-third it is vertical.
The median nerve lies medial to the artery 2.5 cm distal to 
the elbow and then crosses the artery.
The ulnar nerve lies medial to the distal two-third of the 
artery.
It enters the palm by passing in front of flexor 
retinaculum lateral to the ulnar nerve and the pisiform 
bone. It terminates in the hand by dividing into large 
superficial and small deep branches. The superficial 
branch—the continuation of the artery superficial palmar 
arch, which anastomosis with superficial palmar branch of 
the radial artery.
Relations
In the upper part of its course, it lies deep to superficial 
flexor muscles. In the lower part of its course, it becomes 
superficial and lies between the tendons of flexor carpi 
Fig. 9.9 Origin and insertion of the pronator quadratus.
Origin
Oblique ridge on
lower 1/4th of
anterior surface of ulna
Insertion
Lower 1/4th of
anterior surface
of radius 
PRONATOR
QUADRATUS
Fig. 9.10 Arteries of the front of the forearm.
Superficial
palmar arch
(continuation
of ulnar artery)
Ulnar nerve
Medial epicondyle
of humerus
Ulnar nerve
Ulnar artery
Deep palmar arch
(continuation of
radial artery)
Superficial
radial nerve
Deep branch of
radial nerve
Radial artery
Brachial artery
Median nerve
--- Page 128 ---
Forearm
ulnaris and flexor digitorum superficialis. The details are 
as under:
Anterior: The upper part of the ulnar artery is covered by 
five superficial muscles of the forearm, viz.
 
(a) Pronator teres.
 
(b) Flexor carpi radialis.
 
(c) Palmaris longus.
 
(d) Flexor digitorum superficialis.
 
(e) Flexor carpi ulnaris.
 
 The lower part of the ulnar artery is covered only 
by the skin and superficial and deep fasciae.
Posterior: Only the origin of ulnar artery lies on brachialis, 
while in the remaining whole part of its course it 
lies on flexor digitorum profundus.
Medial: 
 
(a) Ulnar nerve.
 
(b) Flexor carpi ulnaris.
Lateral: 
Flexor digitorum superficialis.
Branches
1. Muscular branches to neighboring muscles.
Anterior and posterior ulnar collateral (recurrent) 
arteries, which take part in the arterial anastomosis 
around the elbow joint.
3. Common interosseous artery, which arises from the 
upper part of the ulnar artery and after a very short 
course at the upper border of interosseous membrane, it 
divides into anterior and posterior interosseous arteries. 
4. Anterior and posterior ulnar carpal branches, which 
take part in the formation of anterior and posterior 
carpal arches.
5. Terminal branches are two, the larger superficial branch 
continues as the superficial palmar arch, while the 
smaller deep branch joins the deep palmar arch.
Aberrant ulnar artery: In about 3% of individuals, the ulnar 
artery may arise high in the arm and passes superficial to 
the flexor muscles of the forearm and is termed superfi cial 
ulnar artery. This variation should always be kept in mind 
while withdrawing blood samples or giving intravenous 
injections, because if superficial ulnar artery is mistaken for 
a vein it may be damaged and produce bleeding. Further, if 
an irritating drug is injected into the aberrant artery, the 
result could be fatal.
Clinical correlation
Anterior Interosseous Artery (Fig. 9.21)
It along with the posterior interosseous artery is the main 
source of blood supply to the forearm. It is also the deepest 
artery on the front of the forearm.
The anterior interosseous artery descends on the front of 
interosseous membrane in company with the anterior 
interosseous nerve (a branch of the median nerve). It pierces 
the membrane at the upper border of pronator quadratus to 
enter the posterior compartment of the forearm (cf. peroneal 
artery of the leg), where it anastomoses with the posterior 
interosseous artery and travels underneath the extensor 
retinaculum to reach the dorsal aspect of the wrist to join the 
dorsal carpal arch. The posterior interosseous artery is usually 
smaller than the anterior. It passes posteriorly between the 
oblique cord and proximal border of the interosseous 
membrane. It accompanies the posterior interosseous nerve 
(deep branch of the radial nerve). It gives rise to the 
interosseous recurrent artery, which takes part in the arterial 
anastomosis around the elbow joint.
Radial Artery
Origin and Course
The radial artery is the smaller terminal branch of the 
brachial artery. It begins in cubital fossa at the level of the 
neck of radius. It passes downwards to the wrist with lateral 
convexity. In the upper part, it lies beneath the brachioradialis 
on the deep muscles of the forearm. In the distal part of the 
forearm, it lies on the anterior surface of the radius and is 
covered only by the skin and fascia. The superficial radial 
nerve lies lateral to the middle one-third of the radial artery. 
The radial artery leaves the forearm by winding around the 
lateral aspect of the wrist to reach the anatomical snuff-box 
on the posterior surface of the hand. Its further course is 
described in the hand.
Relations
Anterior: 
 The upper part of the radial artery is overlapped 
by brachioradialis, while its lower part is covered 
only by the skin, and superficial and deep fasciae.
Posterior: The radial artery from above to downward lies 
on the following structures:
(a) Biceps tendon.
 
(b) Supinator.
 
(c) Pronator teres.
 
(d) Flexor digitorum superficialis.
 
 These structures together form the bed of the 
radial artery.
N.B. The radial artery is quite superficial throughout its 
whole course as compared to the ulnar artery.
Branches in the Forearm
1. Muscular branches to the lateral muscles of the forearm.
2. Radial recurrent artery arises in the cubital fossa and 
takes part in the formation of arterial anastomose 
around the elbow joint.
--- Page 129 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
3. Palmar carpal branch, arises near the wrist and anasto-
mosis with the palmar carpal branch of the ulnar artery.
4. Superficial palmar branch arises just above the wrist 
and enters the palm of the hand by passing in front of 
the flexor retinaculum. It joins the terminal part of the 
ulnar artery to complete the superficial palmar arch.
• Examination of radial pulse: It is felt on the radial side of 
the front of wrist where the radial artery lies on the ante-
rior surface of the distal end of radius, and covered only 
by the skin and fascia. At this site, the radial artery lies 
between the tendon of flexor carpi radialis medially and 
tendon of brachioradialis laterally. While examining the 
radial pulse, thumb should not be used because it has its 
own pulse, which may be mistaken for patient’s pulse. The 
radial pulse is commonly used for examining the pulse 
rate.
• Volkmann’s ischemic contracture (ischemic compart-
ment syndrome): The sudden complete occlusion (e.g., 
due to tight plaster cast) or laceration (due to supracondy-
lar fracture of the humerus) of the brachial artery can 
cause paralysis of flexor muscles of the forearm due to 
ischemia within a few hours. The muscles can tolerate 
ischemia up to 6 hours only. Thereafter they undergo 
necrosis and fibrous tissue replaces the necrotic tissue. 
As a result, muscles shorten permanently producing a 
flexor deformity characterized by flexion of the wrist, 
extension of the MP joints, and flexion of the IP joints, 
which leads to loss of hand power.
Clinical correlation
NERVES OF THE FRONT OF THE FOREARM (Fig. 9.11)
The nerves of the front of the forearm are median, radial, 
and ulnar.
The radial and ulnar nerves as their name indicates run 
along the radial and ulnar margins of the forearm inside the 
radial and ulnar nerves. The median nerve, according its 
name, runs in median region of the forearm.
Median Nerve
The median nerve is the principal nerve of the front of the 
forearm and supplies all the muscles of the front of the 
forearm except medial half of the flexor digitorum profundus 
and flexor carpi ulnaris, which are supplied by the ulnar nerve.
The median nerve leaves the cubital fossa by passing 
between the two heads of pronator teres. Here it crosses the 
ulnar artery (from medial to lateral side) from which it is 
separated by the deep head of pronator teres. Then along 
with ulnar artery, it passes beneath fibrous arch joining two 
heads of flexor digitorum superficialis and run deep to this 
muscle on the surface of flexor digitorum profundus.
At the wrist, about 5 cm proximal to flexor retinaculum, 
the median nerve emerges from behind the lateral border of 
the flexor digitorum superficialis and lies behind the tendon 
of palmaris longus. Note that in front of the wrist the median 
nerve becomes superficial lying between the tendons of FDS 
medially and FCR laterally and covered only partly by the 
tendon of palmaris longus.
The median nerve enters the palm of the hand by passing 
deep to the flexor reticulum through carpal tunnel.
Branches (Fig. 9.12)
1. Muscular branches in the cubital fossa to pronator teres, 
flexor carpi radialis (FCR), palmaris longus, and flexor 
digitorum superficialis (FDS).
2. Articular branches to the elbow and proximal radio-
ulnar joint.
3. Anterior interosseous nerve arises in the upper part of 
the forearm and passes downwards on the anterior 
surface of the interosseous membrane between the 
Fig. 9.11 Nerves on the front of the forearm.
Ulnar artery
Radial nerve
Superficial terminal
branch of radial
nerve (superficial
radial nerve)
Deep terminal
branch of radial
nerve (posterior
interosseous nerve)
Radial artery
Ulnar nerve 
Median nerve 
Brachial artery
--- Page 130 ---
Forearm
flexor pollicis longus (FPL) and flexor digitorum 
profundus (FDP). It passes deep to pronator quadratus 
and ends on the anterior surface of the carpus. It supplies 
flexor pollicis longus, lateral half of the flexor digitorum 
profundus, and pronator quadratus. It also provides 
articular twigs to distal radio-ulnar and wrist joints.
4. Palmar cutaneous branch arises about 5 cm above the 
wrist and passes forward in front of flexor retinaculum 
to supply the skin over thenar eminence and central part 
of the palm.
For details see Chapter 13, page 175.
Ulnar Nerve
The ulnar enters the front of the forearm by passing through 
the gap between the two heads of flexor carpi ulnaris (cubital 
tunnel). It then runs downward on the medial side of the 
forearm between the FCU and FDP. It enters the palm of the 
hand by passing in front of the flexor retinaculum lateral to 
the pisiform bone.
In the distal two-third of the forearm, the ulnar artery is 
lateral to the ulnar nerve.
Branches
1. Muscular branches to the flexor carpi ulnaris and medial 
half of the FDP.
2. Articular branch to the elbow joint.
3. Palmar cutaneous branch arises in the middle of the 
forearm and supplies the skin over the hypothenar 
eminence. It sometimes supplies palmaris brevis.
4. Dorsal cutaneous branch arises in distal third of the 
forearm. It passes medially between the tendon of flexor 
carpi ulnaris and ulna to reach the dorsum of the hand.
For details see Chapter 13.
Radial Nerve
The radial nerve enters the cubital fossa from behind the 
arm by descending between the brachioradialis and brachialis 
muscles. In front of lateral epicondyle, it divides into two 
terminal branches—deep and superficial.
The deep branch of radial nerve winds around the neck of 
radius between the two heads of supinator and enters the 
posterior compartment of the forearm as posterior interosseous 
nerve.
The superficial branch of the radial nerve (superficial 
radial nerve) is the main continuation of the radial nerve. It 
runs downwards under the cover of brachioradialis on the 
lateral side of the radial artery. About 7.5 cm above the wrist, 
the nerve leaves the artery, passes underneath the tendon of 
brachioradialis to reach the posterior aspect of the wrist and 
divides into terminal branches (four or five nerves), which 
supply the skin of lateral two-third of the posterior aspect of 
the hand and posterior surface of the proximal phalanges of 
lateral 3½ digits. The area of skin supplied by the radial nerve 
on the dorsum of hand is variable.
For details see Chapter 13, page 174.
Surgical safe-side of forearm: Lateral side of the anterior 
aspect of the forearm is considered to be the ‘safe-side’ by 
the surgeons because the branches of the median nerve, 
the main nerve of the front of the forearm are mostly directed 
medially to supply the muscles of the front of forearm. The 
major nerve on the lateral side is the superficial radial nerve. 
It is only a sensory branch of the radial nerve and runs deep 
to the brachioradialis muscle in the proximal forearm.
Clinical correlation
RELATIONSHIP OF STRUCTURES ON THE FRONT OF 
THE WRIST (Fig. 9.13)
The structures lying in front of the conventional wrist from 
lateral to medial side are:
1. Radial artery.
2. Tendon of flexor carpi radialis (FCR).
3. Tendon of palmaris longus.
4. Flexor digitorum superficialis.
5. Ulnar artery.
6. Ulnar nerve.
7. Tendon of flexor carpi ulnaris.
Fig. 9.12 Branches of the median nerve in the forearm.
Pronator teres
Palmaris longus
Pronator quadratus
Anterior interosseous nerve
Flexor retinaculum
Palmar cutaneous
branch
--- Page 132 ---
Forearm
2. Abductor pollicis longus (APL).
3. Extensor pollicis brevis (EPB).
4. Extensor pollicis longus (EPL).
5. Extensor indicis.
The three deep extensors of the forearm, which act on 
thumb (abductor pollicis longus, extensor pollicis brevis, and 
extensor pollicis longus) lie deep to the superficial extensors 
and in order to gain insertion on the three short long bones 
of thumb ‘crop out’ (emerge) from the furrow in the lateral 
part of the forearm between lateral and posterior groups of 
superficial extensor. These three muscles are therefore 
termed outcropping muscles.
The origin, insertion, nerve supply, and actions of 
deep muscles of the back of forearm are presented in 
Table 9.2.
N.B.
• None of the deep muscles of the back of forearm cross 
the elbow joint.
• All of them arise from the radius, ulna, and interosseous 
membrane.
• All of them are supplied by the posterior interosseous 
nerve (deep branch of the radial nerve).
Fig. 9.14 Arrangement of the superficial muscles on the back of the forearm.
Common extensor
origin
Brachioradialis
Extensor carpi
radialis longus
Extensor carpi
radialis brevis
Abductor pollicis
longus
Outcropping
muscles
Extensor pollicis
brevis
Extensor pollicis
longus
Lateral group of
superficial extensors
Anconeus
Extensor carpi
ulnaris
Extensor digiti
minimi
Extensor digitorum
Lister’s tubercle
Posterior group of
superficial extensors
--- Page 133 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
Table 9.1 Origin, insertion, nerve supply, and actions of the superficial muscles of the back of the forearm (superficial 
extensors)
Muscle
Origin
Insertion
Nerve supply
Actions
Lateral group
Brachioradialis 
(Fig. 9.15)
Upper two-third of the 
lateral supracondylar ridge 
of the humerus
Lateral surface of the distal 
end of radius just above the 
styloid process
Radial nerve
• Flexes the elbow joint. 
• Pronates the supinated 
forearm to midprone 
position
• Supinates the pronated 
forearm to midprone 
position
Extensor carpi radialis 
longus (ECRL)
Lower one-third of the 
lateral supracondylar ridge 
of the humerus
Lateral side of the dorsal 
surface of the base of 
second metacarpal bone
Radial nerve
• Acting with extensor 
carpi ulnaris extends 
the wrist
• Acting with flexor 
carpi radialis abducts 
the wrist
Extensor carpi radialis 
brevis (ECRB)
By a common tendon from 
the lateral epicondyle of the 
humerus and lateral 
ligament of the elbow joint
Lateral side of the dorsal 
surface of the base of third 
metacarpal bone
Posterior interosseous 
nerve before piercing 
the supinator 
-do-
Posterior group
Extensor digitorum
By a common tendon from 
the lateral epicondyle
• Gives rise to four tendons 
for medial four digits. 
• By the extensor expansion 
it is inserted into the 
dorsum of middle and 
terminal phalanges
Posterior interosseous 
nerve
Extends the medial four 
digits. Can also extend 
the wrist
Extensor digiti minimi
By the common tendon 
from the lateral epicondyle
• Lies medial to the 
extensor digitorum 
tendon for the little 
finger. 
• Through the extensor 
expansion, it is inserted 
into the dorsum of 
middle and terminal 
phalanges of little finger
Posterior interosseous 
nerve
• Extends the little 
finger
• Helps in the extension 
of the wrist
Extensor carpi ulnaris 
(ECU)
By the common tendon 
from the lateral epicondyle 
and by an aponeurosis 
from the upper two-third 
of the posterior border of 
ulna along with flexor carpi 
ulnaris and flexor 
digitorum profundus
Into a tubercle on the 
medial side of the dorsal 
surface of the base of the 
fifth metacarpal
Posterior interosseous 
nerve
• Acting with extensor 
carpi radialis it 
extends the wrist
• Acting with flexor 
carpi ulnaris it adducts 
the wrist
Anconeus
From the back of the lateral 
epicondyle
Lateral side of the olecranon 
process and upper one-
fourth of the posterior 
surface of the ulna
Nerve to anconeus, 
which arises from 
radial nerve in spiral 
groove and descends 
through medial head 
of the triceps brachii
Weak extensor of the 
elbow joint
--- Page 134 ---
Forearm
Fig. 9.15 Origin and insertion of the brachioradialis.
BRACHIORADIALIS
Insertion
Lateral side of
distal end of radius
just above the 
styloid process
Origin
Upper 2/3rd of lateral
supracondylar ridge 
Fig. 9.16 Lateral aspect of the lower end of humerus 
showing origin of seven superficial muscles of the back of 
forearm (ECRB = extensor carpi radialis brevis, ED = 
extensor digitorum, EDM = extensor digiti minimi, ECU = 
extensor carpi ulnaris).
Brachioradialis
Brachialis
Anconeus
Extensor carpi
radialis longus
Common extensor origin
(ECRB, ED, EDM, and ECU)
Fig. 9.17 Insertion of the extensor carpi ulnaris, extensor 
carpi radialis longus, and extensor carpi radialis brevis.
Extensor carpi radialis longus (ECRL) inserts on the
dorsal aspect of the base of 2nd metacarpal
Extensor carpi 
ulnaris (ECU)
insets on the medial
side of the base of
5th metacarpal
Extensor carpi radialis 
brevis (ECRB)
insets on the bases of
2nd and 3rd metacarpals
First metacarpal
Fifth metacarpal
Lister’s
tubercle
Tendon of 
extensor indicis
Tendon of
extensor
carpi ulnaris
Proximal
phalanx
Middle
phalanx
Distal
phalanx
Tendon of
extensor
digitorum
Fig. 9.18 Insertion of the extensor digitorum, extensor 
carpi ulnaris, and extensor indicis.
--- Page 135 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
Table 9.2 Origin, insertion, nerve supply, and actions of the deep muscles of the back of the forearm (deep extensors of 
forearm)
Muscle
Origin
Insertion
Nerve supply
Action
Supinator (Fig. 9.20)
• Lateral epicondyle 
• Lateral ligament of the 
elbow joint 
• Annular ligament 
• Supinator crest of ulna 
and from the 
triangular area in front 
of it
Upper one-third of the 
posterior, lateral, and 
anterior surfaces of the 
radius
Posterior interosseous 
nerve before piercing the 
supinator
Supination of the 
forearm
Abductor pollicis 
longus (APL)
• Lateral part of the 
posterior surface of 
ulna below the 
anconeus 
• Middle one-third of 
the posterior surface 
of radius (below the 
posterior oblique line) 
and intervening 
posterior surface of 
interosseous 
membrane
Lateral side of the base 
of first metacarpal
Posterior interosseous 
nerve
Abducts the thumb
Extensor pollicis 
brevis (EPB)
From a small area on the 
posterior surface of 
radius below the origin 
of abductor pollicis 
longus and from 
adjoining interosseous 
membrane
Dorsal surface of the 
base of proximal phalanx 
of thumb
Posterior interosseous 
nerve
Extends the thumb at 
metacarpophalangeal 
joint and extends the 
carpometacarpal joint
Extensor pollicis longus
From lateral part of 
middle one-third of the 
posterior surface of ulna 
and adjoining 
interosseous membrane
Dorsal surface of the 
base of distal phalanx of 
thumb
Posterior interosseous 
nerve
• Extends the joints of 
thumb
• Helps in the extension 
of the wrist
Extensor indicis
From the posterior 
surface of ulna below the 
origin of extensor 
pollicis longus and also 
from the adjoining 
interosseous membrane
• The tendon lies medial 
to the extensor 
digitorum tendon for 
the index finger 
• Through the extensor 
expansion, it is 
inserted into the 
dorsum of middle and 
distal phalanges of the 
index finger
Posterior interosseous 
nerve
• Extends the index 
finger
• Helps in the extension 
of the wrist
--- Page 136 ---
Forearm
Radius
Ulna
Fig. 9.19 A, Origin of five deep muscles of the back of forearm from the posterior aspects of radius and ulna 
(S = supinator, APL = abductor pollicis longus, EPL = extensor pollicis longus, EPB = extensor pollicis brevis, EI = extensor 
indicis); B, Origin and insertion of the deep muscles on the back of the forearm (L = Lister’s tubercle).
Extensor pollicis longus
Insertion
Supinator
Upper 1/3rd of the lateral
surface of radius
Origin
Supinator
Supinator crest of ulna
Extensor indicis
Insertions
Abductor pollicis longus
Radial side of base of 1st metacarpal 
Extensor pollicis brevis
Base of proximal phalanx of thumb
Extensor pollicis longus
Base of distal phalanx of thumb
Extensor indicis
Ulnar side of extensor digitorum
tendon for index finger
Extensor pollicis longus
1. Posterior surface of ulna
2. Interosseous membrane
Extensor pollicis brevis
Abductor pollicis longus
Origins
Abductor pollicis longus
1. Post surface of ulna
2. Interosseous membrane
3. Posterior surface of radius
1. Post surface of ulna
2. Adjoining part of interosseous
 
membrane
Extensor indicis
Extensor pollicis brevis
1. Posterior surface of radius
2. Interosseous membrane
--- Page 137 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
Fig. 9.20 Origin and insertion of the supinator muscle.
Fig. 9.21 Extensor retinaculum.
Origin (contd)
4. Supinator crest
5. Adjoining part of
 triangular area
SUPINATOR
Insertion
Upper 1/3rd of lateral
surface of radius 
Origin
1. Lateral epicondyle of
 humerus
2. Radial collateral
 ligament
3. Annular ligament
Fig. 9.22 Transverse section of the forearm just above the wrist showing structures passing deep to the extensor retinaculum.
Extensor carpi
radialis brevis
Extensor pollicis longus
Extensor carpi
radialis longus
Extensor
pollicis brevis
Abductor
pollicis longus
Radius
Ulna
Posterior interosseous nerve
Extensor digitorum
Extensor indicis
Anterior interosseous artery
Extensor digiti minimi
Extensor carpi ulnaris
EXTENSOR RETINACULUM
The deep fascia on the back of the wrist is thickened to form 
an oblique fibrous band called extensor retinaculum 
(Fig. 11.29). It is directed downwards and laterally, and about 
2 cm broad vertically.
Attachments (Fig. 9.21)
The medial end of extensor retinaculum is attached to the 
styloid process of ulna, triquetral, and pisiform bones.
Its lateral end is attached to the lower part of the anterior 
border of the radius.
Anterior border of
radius
Extensor
retinaculum
Styloid process of ulna
Pisiform
Triquetral
Compartments (Fig. 9.22)
The space deep to the extensor retinaculum is divided into 
six compartments by five septa extending from retinaculum 
to the dorsal aspects of the lower ends of radius and ulna. 
The compartments are numbered I to VI from lateral to 
medial side.
The structures passing through these compartments are 
listed in Table 9.3.
N.B. As the tendons pass across the dorsum of wrist, they 
are enclosed within synovial sheaths called synovial tendon 
sheaths, which reduce the friction of extensor tendons as 
they 
pass 
through 
osseofibrous 
tunnels—the 
compartments under the extensor retinaculum.
Functions
It holds the extensor tendon in place on the back of wrist and 
prevents their bowstrings when the hand is extended at the 
wrist joint.
--- Page 138 ---
Forearm
Table 9.3 Structures passing through various compartments 
beneath the extensor retinaculum of wrist
Compartment
Structure/structures, passing through
• Abductor pollicis longus (APL)
• Extensor pollicis brevis (APB)
• Extensor carpi radialis longus (ECRL)
• Extensor carpi radialis brevis (ECRB)
Extensor pollicis longus (EPL)
• Extensor digitorum (ED)
• Extensor indicis (EI)
• Posterior interosseous nerve
• Anterior interosseous artery
Extensor digiti minimi (EDM)
Extensor carpi ulnaris (EUC)
Fig. 9.23 Branches of the posterior interosseous nerve.
Radial nerve
Brachioradialis
Ext. carpi radialis longus
Supinator
ECRB
Ext. digitorum
Ext. digiti minimi
Ext. carpi ulnaris
Ext. indicis
Superficial radial nerve
Posterior interosseous nerve
Pseudoganglion
Fig. 9.24 Course and relations of the posterior interosseous 
artery.
Superficial radial nerve
(superficial terminal
branch of radial nerve)
Supinator 
Radial nerve 
Oblique cord 
Common 
interosseous 
artery 
Recurrent
interosseous artery
Interosseous membrane 
Abductor 
pollicis longus 
Extensor 
pollicis brevis 
Anterior interosseous 
artery 
Pronator
quadratus
Superficial 
extensors of 
forearm 
Posterior 
interosseous nerve 
Posterior 
interosseous artery 
Extensor 
pollicis longus 
Pseudoganglion 
Posterior
interosseous nerve
(deep terminal branch of
radial nerve)
Anterior
interosseous artery
terminal branches of radial nerve at the level of lateral 
epicondyle of humerus. It leaves the cubital fossa by winding 
around the lateral side of the neck of radius in the substance 
of supinator. After emerging from supinator, it runs in the 
fascial plane between superficial and deep extensor muscles. 
At the lower border of extensor pollicis brevis, it passes deep 
to the extensor pollicis longus to lie on the posterior surface 
of interosseous nerve, on which it runs downwards up to the 
wrist where it ends into a pseudoganglion.
Branches (Fig. 9.23)
1. Muscular branches
(a) Before piercing supinator, it gives branches to the 
extensor carpi radialis brevis and supinator.
(b) While passing through supinator, it gives another 
branch to the supinator.
(c) After emerging from supinator, it gives branches to 
three superficial extensors (extensor digitorum, 
extensor digiti minimi, and extensor carpi ulnaris) 
and all deep extensors.
POSTERIOR INTEROSSEOUS NERVE (Fig. 9.23)
Origin and Course
The posterior interosseous nerve is the deep terminal branch 
of the radial nerve. It is motor and chief nerve of the back of 
the forearm. It begins in the cubital fossa as one of the two
--- Page 139 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
2. Articular branches to the wrist joint, distal radio-ulnar 
joint, and carpal joints.
For details see Chapter 13, page 174.
N.B. All the muscles on the back of forearm are supplied by 
the posterior interosseous nerve except brachioradialis, 
extensor carpi radialis longus, and anconeus, which are 
supplied by the radial nerve directly.
Lesion of posterior interosseous nerve: The posterior 
interosseous nerve (i.e., deep terminal branch of the radial 
nerve) may be damaged during surgical exposure of the 
head of radius in fracture proximal end of radius. Since the 
extensor carpi radialis longus is spared wrist drop does not 
occur.
Clinical correlation
POSTERIOR INTEROSSEOUS ARTERY
The posterior interosseous artery (Fig. 9.24) is a smaller 
terminal branch of the common interosseous artery from 
ulnar artery. It begins in the cubital fossa, enters the back of 
the forearm by passing through the gap between the oblique 
cord and upper margin of the interosseous membrane. From 
here, it passes between supinator and abductor pollicis 
longus to accompany the posterior interosseous nerve. In the 
lower part of the forearm, it becomes markedly reduced and 
ends by anastomosing with the anterior interosseous artery. 
In the lower part of forearm, the anterior interosseous artery 
enters the back of the forearm by piercing interosseous 
membrane just above the pronator quadratus and supplies 
low one-fourth of the back of the forearm. The posterior 
interosseous artery in the cubital fossa gives interosseous 
recurrent artery, which takes part in the formation of 
anastomosis around the elbow joint.
--- Page 141 ---
Elbow and Radio-
ulnar Joints
CHAPTER
ELBOW JOINT
The elbow joint is a joint between the lower end of the 
humerus and upper ends of the radius and ulna. It actually 
includes two articulations: (a) humero-ulnar articulation,
between the trochlea of the humerus and trochlear notch 
of the ulna, and (b) humero-radial articulation, between 
the capitulum of the humerus and the head of radius. On 
the surface, the joint line of elbow is situated 2 cm below 
the line joining the two epicondyles of humerus.
The complexity of elbow joint is further increased by 
its continuity with superior radio-ulnar joint. Thus 
there are three articulations in the elbow region, viz. 
(a) humero-ulnar, (b) humero-radial, and (c) superior 
(proximal) 
radio-ulnar. 
These 
called 
cubital 
articulations (Fig. 10.1).
TYPE
It is a hinge type of synovial joint.
ARTICULAR SURFACES
The upper articular surface is formed by the capitulum and 
the trochlea of the lower end of the humerus.
The lower articular surface is formed by the upper surface 
of the head of the radius and trochlear notch of the ulna.
The capitulum is a rounded hemispherical eminence and 
possesses smooth articular surface only on its anterior and 
inferior aspects.
The trochlea is medial to capitulum and resembles a 
pulley. The medial flange of trochlea projects to a lower level 
than its lateral flange.
Fig. 10.1 Components of the elbow joint: A, schematic diagram; B, radiograph of normal elbow joint (anteroposterior view). 
(Source: Fig. 7.70D, Page 681, Gray’s Anatomy for Students, Richard L Drake, Wayne Vogl, Adam WM Mitchell. Copyright 
Elsevier Inc. 2005, All rights reserved.)
Trochlea
Humerus
Capitulum
Ulnar collateral
ligament
Trochlear
notch of ulna
Radial notch of ulna
Supinator fossa
Quadrate ligament
Superior radio-
ulnar articulation
Radial collateral
ligament
Humero-radial
articulation
Head of radius
Humero-ulnar
articulation
Ulna
Radius
Trochlea
Olecranon
Capitulum
Radius
Head of
radius
Humerus
Ulna
--- Page 142 ---
Elbow and Radio-ulnar Joints
The trochlear notch of ulna is formed by the upper 
surface of the coronoid process and anterior surface of the 
olecranon process. 
The upper end of radius is circular in outline and slightly 
depressed in the center.
N.B. The distal end of humerus has three non-articular 
fossae: (a) olecranon fossa, a deep hollow above the 
posterior part of the trochlea. It lodges the tip of olecranon 
process of ulna during extension of the elbow, (b) coronoid 
fossa, a small hollow above the anterior surface of the 
trochlea. It lodges the anterior margin of coronoid process 
of ulna during flexion of the elbow, and (c) radial fossa,
another small hollow lateral to the coronoid fossa, just above 
the capitulum. It lodges the anterior margin of the head of 
radius during flexion of the elbow.
LIGAMENTS (Figs 10.2 and 10.3)
CAPSULAR LIGAMENT (JOINT CAPSULE)
It is a fibrous sac enclosing the joint cavity (Fig. 10.2). The 
inner surface of the capsule is lined by the synovial membrane. 
Attachment
Above, it is attached to the medial epicondyle, upper 
margins of radial, coronoid, and olecranon fossae, and 
lateral epicondyle of the humerus, i.e., it encloses all the 
non-articular fossae at the lower end of the humerus.
Below, it is attached to the anterior and medial margins 
of the coronoid process of ulna, upper margin of the annu-
lar ligament, and upper and medial margins of the olecra-
non process. Note, it is not attached to the radius.
To facilitate the movements of flexion and extension, 
the anterior and posterior aspects of the capsule are 
thinner than the sides. The inner surface of the joint 
capsule and non-articular bony parts inside the capsule 
are lined by synovial membrane (Fig. 10.3). The synovial 
membrane forms a crescentic fold between humero-radial 
and humero-ulnar parts, which contains an extrasynovial 
fat. Between the synovial membrane and joint capsule, 
there are three other fat pads occupying olecranon, 
coronoid, and radial fossae. The synovial membrane of 
elbow joint is continuous inferiorly with the synovial 
membrane of the superior radio-ulnar joint.
Fig. 10.2 Attachment of capsular ligament of elbow joint: A, anterior aspect; B, posterior aspect; C, anterosuperior 
aspect.
Olecranon process
Capsular ligament
Ulna
Radius
Head of
radius
Annular
ligament
Trochlear notch
Capsular
ligament 
Olecranon
fossa
Capitulum
Medial
epicondyle
Trochlea
Radial fossa
Capsular
ligament 
Coronoid
fossa 
Trochlea
Medial
epicondyle
Capitulum
--- Page 144 ---
Elbow and Radio-ulnar Joints
brachii. The last three structures are 
separated from joint capsule by brachialis.
Posterior: 
(a) Tendon of triceps (b) anconeus.
Medially: 
 (a) Flexor carpi ulnaris, (b) ulnar nerve 
(posteromedially) (c) common flexor origin 
of the muscles of forearm (anteromedially).
Laterally 
 (a) Spinator (b) common extensor origin of 
(posterolateral): muscles of forearm muscles, (c) extensor carpi 
radialis brevis.
BURSAE RELATED TO THE ELBOW JOINT
Four important bursae are related to the elbow joints— 
(a) two in relation to the triceps insertion and (b) two in 
relation to the biceps insertion:
Subtendinous olecranon bursa, a small bursa between 
triceps tendon and upper surface of the olecranon process.
2. Subcutaneous olecranon bursa, a large bursa between 
skin and subcutaneous triangular area on the posterior 
surface of the olecranon.
3. Bicipitoradial bursa, a small bursa separating biceps 
tendon from smooth anterior part of the radial tuberos-
ity.
4. A small bursa separating the biceps tendon from the 
oblique cord.
STABILITY OF THE ELBOW JOINT
In adults, the elbow joint is quite stable due to the following 
two factors:
1. Pulley-shaped trochlea of humerus fits properly into 
jaw-like trochlear notch of ulna.
2. Strong ulnar and radial collateral ligaments.
BLOOD SUPPLY
The blood supply of elbow joints is by arterial anastomosis 
around the elbow formed by the branches of brachial, radial, 
and ulnar arteries.
NERVE SUPPLY
Nerve supply of elbow joint is by articular branches from:
(a) radial nerve (through its branch to anconeus),
(b) musculocutaneous nerve (through its branch to 
brachialis),
(c) ulnar nerve, and
(d) median nerve.
Fig. 10.5 Radial collateral ligament.
Lateral epicondyle
of humerus
Radial collateral
ligament
Annular ligament
Radius
Fig. 10.6 Relations of the elbow joint.
Brachialis muscle
Tendon of biceps
Brachial artery
Median nerve 
Anterior
relations
Flexor carpi
ulnaris
Common
flexor origin
Ulnar nerve
Cut edge of
joint capsule
Tendon
of triceps
Anconeus
Posterior relations
Nerve to
anconeus
Extensor carpi
radialis brevis
Common
extensor origin
Medial
relations
Lateral
relations
Brachialis
--- Page 145 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
MOVEMENTS
Being an uniaxial joint, the elbow joint allows only flexion 
and extension. The range of flexion is about 140°. These 
movements and muscles producing them are presented in 
Table 10.1.
CARRYING ANGLE (Fig. 10.7)
The transverse axis of elbow joint is not transverse but 
oblique being directed downwards and medially. This is 
because medial flange of trochlea lies about 6 mm below its 
lateral flange. Consequently when the elbow is extended the 
arm and forearm do not lie in straight line, rather forearm is 
deviated slightly laterally. This angle of deviation of long axis 
of forearm from long axis of arm is termed carrying angle.
The carrying angle disappears during pronation and full 
flexion of forearm.
The forearm comes into line with the arm in the midprone 
position—the position in which the hand is mostly used.
The carrying angle varies from 5° to 15° and is more 
pronounced in females. The wider carrying angle in females 
avoids rubbing of forearms with the wider female pelvis 
while carrying loads, e.g., buckets filled with water from one 
place to another.
• Elbow effusion: The distension of elbow joint due to 
effusion within its cavity occurs posteriorly because 
capsule of the joint is thin posteriorly and covering fascia 
is also thin. The joint is aspirated by inserting a needle on 
the posterolateral side, above the head of radius with 
elbow at the right angle.
• Dislocation of elbow: Posterior dislocations of elbow are 
more common and are often associated with fracture of the 
coronoid process. The dislocation invariably occurs by falling 
on an outstretched hand. The triangular relationship 
between the olecranon and the epicondyles of humerus is 
lost. Note, in normal flexed elbow the tip of olecranon 
process and two epicondyles of humerus form an ‘equilateral 
triangle’ (Fig. 10.8).
 The reduction, if done early, is achieved fairly easily by 
first giving traction to overcome spasm and then flexing 
the forearm to lever joint back into the place.
• Nursemaid’s elbow/pulled elbow (subluxation of head of 
radius; Fig. 10.9) occurs in preschool children, 1–3 years old 
when the forearm is suddenly pulled in pronation. The head 
of radius comes out of annular ligament and the elbow is 
kept slightly flexed and pronated. An attempt to supinate the 
forearm causes severe pain.
 The reduction is easily achieved by supinating and 
extending the elbow and simultaneously applying direct 
pressure posteriorly on the head of radius.
• Tennis elbow (lateral epicondylitis; Fig 10.10): It is a 
clinical condition characterized by pain and tenderness 
over the lateral epicondyle of the humerus with pain during 
abrupt pronation. It occurs due to:
 (a) sprain of lateral collateral ligament of elbow joint, or (b) a 
tear of the fibres of extensor carpi radialis brevis, or (c) an 
inflammation of bursa underneath the extensor carpi radialis 
brevis, or (d) strain or tear of common extensor origin.
• Golfer’s elbow (medial epicondylitis; Fig 10.10): It is a 
clinical condition characterized by pain and tenderness 
over the medial epicondyle of the humerus. It occurs due 
to strain or tear of common flexor origin with subsequent 
inflammation of medial epicondyle, following repetitive use 
of superficial flexors of forearm as during playing golf.
• Student’s 
elbow 
(Miner’s 
elbow; 
10.11) 
characterized by a round fluctuating painful swelling over 
the olecranon. It occurs due to inflammation of 
subcutaneous olecranon bursa lying over subcutaneous 
triangular area on the posterior aspect of the olecranon 
process.
Clinical correlation
Table 10.1 Movements of the elbow joint
Movements
Muscles producing movements
Flexion
• Brachialis
• Biceps brachii
• Brachioradialis*
Extension
• Triceps
• Anconeus
*The brachioradialis acts most effectively in midprone position as when 
medical students walk by putting their aprons over their shoulders.
Fig. 10.7 Carrying angle.
Carrying
angle
10º to 15º
Long axis of
Lateral (outward)
deviation of extended and
supinated forearm
Long axis of
forerarm
--- Page 146 ---
Elbow and Radio-ulnar Joints
Fig 10.8 A, Formation of equilateral triangle by three bony points behind flexed elbow; B, elbow joint with normal relationship 
of three bony points of the elbow; C, posterior dislocation of the elbow joint causing disturbance in the relationship of three 
bony points of the elbow due to backward and upward displacement of the olecranon process. (Source: Fig. 2.2(A): B; Fig. 
2.2(B): A; and B, Page 52, Clinical and Surgical Anatomy, 2e, Vishram Singh. Copyright Elsevier 2007, All rights reserved.)
Lateral epicondyle
Medial
epicondyle
Olecranon process
Fig. 10.9 Pulled elbow: A, head of radius within 
cup-shaped annular ligament; B, head of radius displaced 
down from the annular ligament.
Radial 
collateral 
lig.
Annular lig.
Annular lig.
Radial
collateral
lig.
Fig. 10.10 Lateral and medial epicondylitis.
Lateral epicondylitis
(Tennis elbow)
Medial
epicondylitis
(Golfer’s elbow)
Fig. 10.11 Student’s (Miner's) elbow.
Olecranon
process of ulna
Inflamed and enlarged 
subcutaneous olecranon bursa
Student’s elbow
• Nerve entrapments (compressions) around elbow: 
The nerve entrapments around elbow are common and 
cause pain, muscle atrophy, and weakness in the area 
supplied by the entrapped nerve. The examples are:
(a) Median nerve entrapment: The median nerve may be 
compressed: (a) where it passes between the two 
heads of pronator teres or (b) where it passes deep to 
fibrous arch between humero-ulnar and radial heads 
of flexor digitorum superficialis.
(b) Ulnar nerve entrapment: The ulnar nerve may be 
compressed (a) where it passes posterior to the 
medial epicondyle of the humerus (commonest site) 
or (b) where it passes through cubital tunnel formed 
by tendinous arch joining the humeral and ulnar 
heads of flexor carpi ulnaris.
(c) Posterior interosseous nerve entrapment: The 
posterior interosseous nerve may be compressed 
(a) where it passes deep to the arcade of Frohse, a 
musculoaponeurotic structure at the proximal edge of 
supinator muscle or (b) where it passes through the 
substance of supinator muscle.
RADIO-ULNAR JOINTS
The radius and ulna form two joints between them; one at 
their upper ends and one at their lower ends. They are called 
superior and inferior radio-ulnar joints (Fig. 10.12). Both 
these joints are synovial joints of pivot variety. They are
--- Page 147 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
uniaxial joints permitting only rotation. The shafts of radius 
and ulna are also connected to each other by interosseous 
membrane. This union between radius and ulna is sometimes 
termed middle radio-ulnar joint.
SUPERIOR (PROXIMAL) RADIO-ULNAR JOINT
TYPE
It is a pivot type of synovial joint.
ARTICULAR SURFACES
The articulating surfaces are: (a) circumference of radial 
head and (b) fibro-osseous ring made by radial notch of ulna 
and annular ligament.
LIGAMENTS
1. Capsular ligament (joint capsule): The fibrous capsule 
surrounds the joint. It is continuous with that of elbow 
joint and is attached to the annular ligament.
2. Annular ligament: It is a strong fibrous band, which 
encircles the head of radius and holds it against the 
radial notch of ulna. It forms about four-fifth of the 
fibro-osseous ring within which the head of radius 
rotates. Medially the annular ligament is attached 
to the margins of radial notch of ulna. The upper 
margin of the ligament is continuous with the capsule 
of the shoulder joint and its lower part becomes 
narrow and embraces the neck of radius. The inner 
surface of annular ligament is covered by a thin layer 
of cartilage. Laterally, it blends with the radial 
collateral ligament.
3. Quadrate ligament: It is thin, fibrous ligament, which 
extends from neck of radius to the upper part of 
supinator fossa of ulna just below the radial notch.
Synovial membrane: It lines the inner aspect of the joint 
capsule and annular ligament of superior radio-ulnar 
joint and is continuous with the synovial membrane of 
the elbow joint. It is prevented from herniation by 
quadrate ligament.
Fig. 10.12 Radio-ulnar joints. Figure in the inset on the left shows socket for head of radius (formed by annular ligament).
Coronoid process of ulna
Trochlear
notch
Lateral collateral
ligament of elbow joint
Annular ligament
Ulna
Oblique cord
Radial notch of
ulna
Radius
Annular ligament
Radial collateral
ligament of elbow joint
Interosseous
membrane
Recessus
sacciformis
Articular disc
Capitulum
Head of radius
Trochlear notch
Superior radio-ulnar
joint
Middle radio-ulnar
joint
Inferior radio-ulnar
joint
--- Page 148 ---
Elbow and Radio-ulnar Joints
RELATIONS
Anteriorly and laterally: Supinator muscle.
Posteriorly: Anconeus muscle.
BLOOD SUPPLY
By articular branches derived from arterial anastomosis on 
the lateral side of the elbow joint.
NERVE SUPPLY
By articular branches from musculocutaneous, median, 
radial, and ulnar nerves.
MOVEMENTS
Supination and pronation.
INFERIOR (DISTAL) RADIO-ULNAR JOINT
TYPE
Synovial joint of pivot variety.
ARTICULAR SURFACES
The articulating surfaces are (a) convex head of ulna, and 
(b) concave ulnar notch of radius.
LIGAMENTS
1. Capsular ligament (joint capsule): It is a fibrous sac 
which encloses the joint cavity and is attached to the 
margins of articular surfaces. The inner surface of the 
joint capsule is lined by synovial membrane. The syno-
vial lining of the joint sends an upward prolongation in 
front of the lower part of the interosseous membrane 
called recessus sacciformis. The synovial cavity of joint 
does not communicate with the synovial cavity of the 
wrist joint.
2. Articular disc: It is a triangular fibrocartilaginous disc 
and is sometimes referred to by clinicians as triangular 
ligament. Its apex is attached to the base of the styloid 
process of ulna and its base to the lower margin of the 
ulnar notch of radius. The articular disc separates the 
inferior radio-ulnar joint from the wrist joint.
3. Stability of elbow joint: The main factors providing sta-
bility to elbow joint are:
(a) Wrench-shaped articular surface of the olecranon 
process of ulna and pulley-shaped trochlea of 
humerus.
(b) Strong medial and lateral collateral ligaments.
RELATIONS
Anteriorly: Flexor digitorum profundus.
Posteriorly: Extensor digiti minimi.
BLOOD SUPPLY
By anterior and posterior interosseous arteries.
NERVE SUPPLY
By anterior and posterior interosseous nerves.
A brief comparison of superior and inferior radio-ulnar 
joints is presented in Table 10.2.
MOVEMENTS
Supination and pronation.
INTEROSSEOUS MEMBRANE OF
THE FOREARM (Fig. 10.8)
It is the fibrous sheet, which stretches between the 
interosseous borders of the radius and ulna. It holds these 
bones together and does not interfere with the movements, 
which take place between them. The oblique cord of fibrous 
tissue extending from lateral side of ulnar tuberosity to the 
lower end of radial tuberosity also helps to hold the radius 
and ulna together. This union between radius and ulna is 
sometimes termed middle radio-ulnar joint. This is a 
syndesmosis type of fibrous joint.
Table 10.2 Superior and inferior radio-ulnar joints
Features
Superior radio-ulnar joint
Inferior radio-ulnar joint
Type
Pivot type of synovial joint
Pivot type of synovial joint
Articular surfaces
• Circumference of head of radius
• Fibro-osseous ring formed by annular 
ligament and radial notch of ulna
• Head of ulna
• Ulnar notch of radius
Joint cavity
Communicates with the cavity of elbow joint
Does not communicate with the cavity of wrist joint
Prime stabilizing factor
Annular ligament
Articular disc
Movements
Supination and pronation
Supination and pronation
--- Page 150 ---
Elbow and Radio-ulnar Joints
Table 10.3 Movements of supination and pronation
Movements
Muscles producing movements
Supination
• Supinator
• Biceps brachii supinates the forearm while 
the elbow is flexed
• Brachioradialis supinates the pronated 
forearm to midprone position
Pronation*
• Pronator teres
• Pronator quadratus
• Brachioradialis, pronates the supinated 
forearm to midprone position
*The flexor carpi radialis, palmaris longus and gravity also help in pronation.
In supination, the radius and ulna lie parallel to each 
other. In pronation, there is rotation of lower end of radius 
along with articular disc on the head of ulna. As a result, 
the lower end of radius crosses in front of the lower end of 
ulna. Simultaneously the head of radius rotates within the 
fibro-osseous ring formed by the annular ligament and the 
radial notch of the ulna.
The movements of the supination and pronation, and 
muscle producing them are given in Table 10.3.
N.B. The supination is more powerful than pronation because: 
(a) it has antigravity movement, and (b) it is performed by 
powerful muscles, viz. biceps brachii. The pronation is less 
powerful than supination because it is performed by less 
powerful muscles, viz. pronator quadratus and pronator teres. 
Therefore, supination movements are used for tightening the 
nuts and bolts, whereas pronation movements are used for 
loosening/opening the nuts and bolts.
Morphologically, movements of supination and pronation 
are evolved for picking up the food and taking it to the 
mouth. The food is picked up in pronation and put in mouth in 
supination.
--- Page 152 ---
Hand
CHAPTER
The hand (L. Manus) is the distal part/segment of the upper 
limb. It is a complex and highly evolved anatomic structure, 
which provides primary touch input to the brain and enables 
humans to perform complex fine motor tasks by way of its 
free movements, power grip, precision grip, handling, and 
pinching. The hand is man’s great physical asset. It has enabled 
him to use various tools that his brain has invented. Therefore, 
good understanding of its structure and functions is essential. 
Everything that the doctors do to the hand should be aimed at 
restoring or maintaining its function. The movements of the 
hand occur primarily at the wrist joint or radio-carpal joint 
formed by the articulation of radius and first row of the carpal 
bones (e.g., scaphoid, lunate, and triquetral).
The hand consists of four functional units, viz.
1. Carpus.
2. Thumb.
3. Index finger.
4. A unit comprising middle, ring, and little fingers.
The carpus (first unit) provides a stabilizing platform for 
the three mobile units (2, 3, and 4).
The hand contains carpal bones, metacarpal bones, and 
phalanges.
N.B. Anatomically, the term wrist refers to carpus (carpal 
region) consisting of eight carpal bones and lies between 
forearm and hand but in general usage, wrist refers to distal 
end of forearm just proximal to distal ends of radius and 
ulna, around which the wrist watch is worn.
PALMAR ASPECT OF THE HAND
SURFACE LANDMARKS (Fig. 11.1)
1. Tubercle of scaphoid—can be felt at the base of thenar 
eminence, just lateral to the tendon of flexor carpi 
radialis. It is located deep to the lateral part of distal 
transverse crease of the wrist.
2. Tubercle/crest of trapezium—can be felt on deep 
palpation, distolateral to the tubercle of scaphoid.
3. Pisiform bone—can be felt at the base of hypothenar 
eminence medially. It lies deep to medial end of distal 
transverse crease of the wrist.
4. Hook of hamate—can be felt one finger’s breadth distal 
to the pisiform bone.
SKIN OF THE PALM
The skin of the palm presents the following characteristic 
features:
1. It is thick to withstand wear and tear during work.
2. It is richly supplied by the sweat glands but contains no 
hair or sebaceous glands.
3. It is immobile as it is firmly attached to the underlying 
palmar aponeurosis.
4. It presents several longitudinal and transverse creases 
where the skin is firmly bound to the deep fascia.
N.B. To improve the grip the skin of the palm is ridged and 
furrowed and devoid of greasy sebaceous glands.
Fig. 11.1 Surface landmarks.
Crest of trapezium
Tubercle of scaphoid
Pisiform bone
Hook of hamate
--- Page 153 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
Flexion Creases of the Wrist, Palm, and Fingers (Fig. 11.2)
1. Flexion creases of the wrist (wrist creases): The palmar 
aspect of the wrist presents two transverse flexion 
creases, viz.
(a) Proximal wrist crease.
(b) Distal wrist crease.
They are produced as a result of folding of the skin due to 
repeated flexion of the wrist. The distal wrist crease 
corresponds to the proximal border of the flexor retinaculum.
2. Palmar flexion creases: Usually there are four major 
palmar creases—two horizontal and two longitudinal 
which together roughly form an M-shaped pattern:
(a) Longitudinal palmar creases:
(i) Radial longitudinal crease (lifeline of the 
palmistry): It partly encircles the thenar 
eminence (ball of the thumb) and is formed 
due to action of short muscles of the thumb.
(ii) Midpalmar longitudinal crease (line of fate in 
palmistry): It indicates the lateral limit of the 
hypothenar eminence (ball of the little finger). 
It is formed due to the action of short muscles 
of the little finger.
(b) Transverse palmar creases:
(i) Distal transverse palmar crease: It begins at or 
near the interdigital cleft between the index and 
little fingers and crosses the palm (with slight 
distal convexity) superficial to the shafts of the 
third, fourth, and fifth metacarpals.
(ii) Proximal transverse palmar crease: It commences 
at the lateral border of the palm in common with 
the radial longitudinal crease, superficial to the 
head of the second metacarpal. It extends medially 
and slight proximally across the palm, superficial 
to the shafts of the third, fourth, and fifth 
metacarpals.
3. Digital flexion creases: Each of the medial four digits 
have three transverse flexion creases, while the thumb 
has two transverse creases:
(a) Proximal flexion crease: It lies at the root of the finger 
about 2 cm distal to the metacarpophalangeal (MP) 
joint.
(b) Middle flexion crease: It lies over the proximal 
interphalangeal (PIP) joint.
(c) Distal flexion crease: It lies on or just proximal to the 
distal interphalangeal (DIP) joint.
The digital flexion creases become deeper when the digits are 
flexed.
Friction Ridges
The friction skin ridges are present on the finger pads called 
fingerprints. These have basic similarities but are not 
identical in any two individuals including identical twins. 
The four basic types of fingerprints are (Fig. 11.3): (a) arch, 
(b) whorl, (c) loop, and (d) composite (combination of first 
three). They are produced due to the pull of elastic fibres 
within the dermis. The friction ridges prevent the slippage 
when grasping the objects. The science of classification and 
identification of fingerprints is called dermatoglyphics.
• The person with Down syndrome (trisomy-21) usually has 
only one transverse palmar crease called simian crease.
• Since the fingerprints are not identical in any two 
individuals including identical twins, they are used in 
criminal investigations to identify criminals.
Clinical correlation
Fig. 11.2 Flexor creases on the palmar aspect of wrist, 
palm, and digits.
Distal digital
flexion crease
Distal wrist
crease
Proximal wrist crease
Middle digital
flexion crease
Proximal digital
flexion crease
Radial
longitudinal
crease
Distal transverse
palmar crease
Proximal transverse
palmar crease
Midpalmar
longitudinal
crease
Fig. 11.3 Types of finger prints: A, arch; B, whorl; C, loop; 
D, composite.
--- Page 154 ---
Hand
SUPERFICIAL FASCIA OF THE PALM
The superficial fascia of the palm is made up of dense fibrous 
bands, which anchor the skin to the deep fascia of the palm. 
The superficial fascia of the palm presents two important 
features:
1. It contains a subcutaneous muscle, the palmaris brevis
on the ulnar side of the palm, which probably helps to 
improve the grip.
2. It thickens to form a superficial metacarpal ligament, 
which stretches across the roots of fingers over the digital 
nerve and vessels.
Palmaris Brevis Muscle
It is subcutaneous muscle in the superficial fascia of the 
medial part of the palm. Morphologically, it represents the 
panniculus carnosus.
Origin 
From flexor retinaculum and palmar aponeurosis.
Insertion 
Into the skin along the medial border of the hand.
Nerve supply 
Superficial branch of the ulnar nerve.
Actions 
When an object is grasped tightly in the hand, it causes 
wrinkling of the medial palmar skin and helps to prevent the 
ulnar displacement of the hypothenar eminence.
DEEP FASCIA OF THE PALM
The deep fascia on the palmar aspect of hand is specialized to 
form three structures:
1. Flexor retinaculum.
2. Palmar aponeurosis.
3. Fibrous flexor sheaths of digits.
Flexor Retinaculum (Transverse Carpal Ligament)
It is a strong fibrous band which bridges the anterior 
concavity of carpus and converts it into an osseofibrous 
tunnel called carpal tunnel for the passage of flexor tendons 
of the digits.
The flexor retinaculum is rectangular and is formed due 
to thickening of the deep fascia in front of carpal bones.
Attachments (Fig. 11.4)
Medially: It is attached to the pisiform and the hook of 
hamate.
Laterally: It is attached to the tubercle of scaphoid and the 
crest of trapezium.
N.B.
On either side, the flexor retinaculum gives a slip (Fig. 11.4).
• A superficial slip on the medial side (called volar carpal 
ligament) is attached to the pisiform bone. The ulnar 
nerve and vessels pass deep to this slip. 
• A deep slip on the lateral side is attached to the medial 
lip of groove of trapezium, converting it into a osseofibrous 
tunnel for the passage of the tendon of flexor carpi 
radialis.
Relations
Structures passing superficial to flexor retinaculum
From medial to lateral side these are (Fig. 11.5):
1. Ulnar nerve.
2. Ulnar artery.
3. Palmar cutaneous branch of ulnar nerve.
4. Tendon of palmaris longus.
5. Palmar cutaneous branch of median nerve.
6. Superficial palmar branch of radial artery.
Structures passing deep to the flexor retinaculum (i.e. through 
carpal tunnel)
These are as follows (Fig. 11.5):
1. Tendons of flexor digitorum superficialis (FDS).
2. Tendons of flexor digitorum profundus (FDP).
Fig. 11.4 Attachment of additional medial and lateral slips of the flexor retinaculum. A, at the level of proximal row of carpal 
bones; B, at the level of distal row of carpal bones.
Tubercle
of scaphoid
Scaphoid
Lunate
Triquetral
Pisiform
Flexor retinaculum
Flexor
retinaculum
Crest of
trapezium
Deep slip
Trapezium
Groove of
trapezium
Trapezoid
Capitate
Hamate
Carpal tunnel
Superficial slip
(volar carpal ligament)
Carpal tunnel
--- Page 155 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
3. Tendon of flexor pollicis longus (FPL).
4. Median nerve.
N.B.
• The flexor tendons of fingers (i.e., tendons of FDS and 
FDP) are enclosed in a synovial sheath called ulnar bursa.
• The tendon of flexor pollicis longus is on the radial side 
and enclosed in a separate synovial sheath called radial 
bursa.
• The tendon of flexor carpi radialis pass through a 
separate canal in the lateral part of the flexor retinaculum.
Palmar Aponeurosis
The deep fascia of the palm is thin over thenar and 
hypothenar eminences and thick in the central part of the 
palm where it forms the palmar aponeurosis.
The palmar aponeurosis (Fig. 11.6) is strong well-defined 
part of the deep fascia of the palm which covers the long 
flexor tendons and superficial palmar arch. It is triangular in 
shape and made up mainly of longitudinal fibres and few 
transverse fibres intersecting the former.
Its apex is directed proximally towards the wrist and its 
base is directed distally towards the roots of the fingers.
Features
The palmar aponeurosis presents the following features:
1. Apex.
2. Base.
3. Medial border.
4. Lateral border.
Apex: It is the narrow proximal end of palmar aponeurosis, 
which blends with flexor retinaculum. Its superficial fibres 
are continuous with the tendon palmaris longus.
Base: It is the broad distal end of palmar aponeurosis. Just 
proximal to the heads of metacarpals, the base divides into 
Fig. 11.5 Transverse section of wrist across the carpal tunnel showing structures passing superficial and deep to the flexor 
retinaculum.
Superficial palmar
branch of radial artery
Tendon of flexor
carpi radialis
Tendon of flexor
pollicis longus
Radial bursa
Ulnar bursa
Ulnar nerve
Volar carpal ligament
Ulnar artery
Palmar cutaneous
branch of ulnar nerve
Palmar cutaneous
branch of median nerve
Tendon of palmaris longus
Tendons of flexor
digitorum profundus
Tendons of flexor
digitorum superficialis
Median nerve
Fig. 11.6 Palmar aponeurosis.
Tendon of
palmaris longus
Flexor retinaculum
Palmaris brevis
Palmar aponeurosis
Digital nerves and
vessels
Terminal phalanges
Fibrous flexor
sheaths
four longitudinal slips, one each of medial four digits. Each 
slip, further divides into two slips, which blend with the 
fibrous flexor sheaths of the corresponding digits.
The digital nerve and vessels and tendons of lumbrical 
emerge through the intervals between the four longitudinal 
slips.
Medial border: The medial edge of aponeurosis is continu-
ous with the deep fascia covering the hypothenar muscles 
and gives origin to the palmaris brevis.
The medial palmar septum extends inwards from this edge 
to the fifth metacarpal. The intermediate palmar septum 
extends inwards from near this edge obliquely to the third 
metacarpal.
--- Page 156 ---
Hand
Lateral border: The lateral edge of the aponeurosis is 
continuous with the deep fascia covering the thenar muscles. 
Lateral palmar septum extends inwards from this edge to the 
first metacarpal.
N.B. Morphologically, palmar aponeurosis represents the 
degenerated tendons of palmaris longus muscle.
Functions
1. Helps to improve the grip of hand by fixing the skin.
2. Protects the underlying tendons, nerves, and vessels.
Dupuytren’s contracture (Fig. 11.7): It is a progressive 
fibrosis (interstitial increase in the fibrous tissue) in the 
medial part of the palmar aponeurosis. Consequently the 
medial part of the aponeurosis may undergo progressive 
thickening to form permanent contracture resulting in the 
flexion deformity of the little and ring fingers. The ring finger 
is most commonly affected. The proximal and middle 
phalanges are acutely flexed but distal phalanges remain 
unaffected. A surgical fasciectomy is required if the hand 
function is grossly impaired.
Clinical correlation
FIBROUS FLEXOR SHEATHS OF 
THE FINGERS (Fig. 11.8)
The deep fascia on the anterior surface of each digit thickens 
and arches over the long flexor tendon to form the fibrous 
sheath of the finger, which extends from the head of the 
metacarpal to the base of distal phalanx.
Attachments
The arched fibrous sheath is attached to the margins of the 
phalanges and palmar ligaments of interphalangeal joints. 
The proximal end of sheath is open. Here its margins are 
continuous with the distal slips of the palmar aponeurosis. 
Fig. 11.7 Dupuytren’s contracture.
Localized thickening and
contracture of palmar
aponeurosis
Fig. 11.8 Fibrous flexor sheaths of the fingers: A, attachment of the sheath; B, tendons passing through the sheath; 
C, arrangement of fibres within sheath—cruciate fibres in front of joints and transverse fibres in front of bones (FDS = flexor 
digitorum superficialis, FDP = flexor digitorum profundus).
Tendon of FDS
Fibrous
flexor sheath
Cruciform
parts
Tendon of flexor
digitorum profundus
Palmar ligaments of
IP joints
Tendon of FDP
Annular/
transverse parts
--- Page 157 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
Fig. 11.10 Ulnar bursa, radial bursa, and digital synovial 
sheaths.
Flexor
retinaculum
Ulnar bursa
Digital synovial
sheaths
Radial bursa
The distal end of sheath is attached to the palmar surface of 
the distal phalanx just distal to the insertion of flexor 
digitorum profundus. Thus the sheath along with the 
anterior surfaces of the phalanges and palmar ligaments of 
interphalangeal joints forms a blind osseofibrous tunnel
through which passes long flexor tendons enclosed in the 
digital synovial sheath.
The osseofibrous tunnel of each finger contains a pair of 
tendons (tendon of flexor digitorum superficialis and tendon 
of flexor digitorum profundus).
The osseofibrous tunnel of thumb contains the tendon of 
flexor pollicis longus.
The fibrous sheath is thick over the phalanges, and thin 
and lax over the interphalangeal joints to permit flexion.
The annular and cruciform parts (referred to as pulleys by 
the clinicians) are thickened reinforcements of the fibrous 
flexor sheaths.
Function
The fibrous flexor sheaths hold the tendons in position 
during flexion of digits.
Trigger finger: It is a clinical condition, in which a finger 
gets locked in full flexion and can be extended only after 
excessive voluntary effort or with the help of the other hand. 
When extension begins it occurs suddenly and with a click, 
hence the name—trigger fi nger. This condition is caused by 
the presence of a localized thickening of a long flexor 
tendon, preventing movement of the tendon within the 
fibrous flexor sheath of the digit. When tendon tries to move, 
its thickened part is caught in the osseofibrous tunnel 
momentarily. This condition can be relieved surgically by 
incising the fibrous flexor sheath.
Clinical correlation
SYNOVIAL SHEATHS OF LONG FLEXOR TENDONS
The synovial sheaths around the long flexor tendons serve 
as a lubricating device to prevent their friction, while 
moving within the osseofibrous tunnels.
The synovial sheath around the tendon(s) is double 
layered consisting of an outer and inner layer with lubricating 
synovial fluid between the two layers.
Every tendon within the synovial sheath has a mesotendon 
of synovial membrane which conveys vessels to the tendon 
(cf. mesenteries of the gut; Fig. 11.9 inset).
Ulnar Bursa (Figs 11.9 and 11.10)
The long flexor tendons of the fingers (four of flexor digitorum 
superficialis and four of flexor digitorum profundus), while 
passing through the osseofibrous carpal tunnel are enclosed in 
a common synovial sheath called ulnar bursa. The tendon 
invaginates the sheath from the lateral side.
Fig. 11.9 Synovial sheaths around the long flexor tendons. 
Figure in the inset shows two layers of synovial sheath and 
mesotendon (FDS = flexor digitorum superficialis, FDP = 
flexor digitorum profundus, FPL = flexor pollicis longus).
Digital synovial
sheaths
Synovial sheath
around the
tendon of 
flexor pollicis
longus 
(radial bursa)
Common synovial
sheath around long flexor
tendons of fingers
(ulnar bursa)
Tendon of FPL
Tendons of
FDS and FDP
Tendon
Mesotendon
--- Page 158 ---
Hand
The ulnar bursa extends proximally into the forearm 
about a finger breadth (5 cm) proximal to the flexor 
retinaculum. Distally it extends in the palm up to the middle 
of the shafts of the metacarpal bones.
The distal medial end of ulnar bursa is continuous with 
the digital synovial sheath of the little finger.
Radial Bursa (Figs 11.9 and 11.10)
The tendon of flexor pollicis longus while passing through 
osseofibrous carpal tunnel is enclosed in a synovial sheath 
called radial bursa. Proximally it extends into the forearm 
about a finger breadth proximal to the flexor retinaculum. 
Distally it is continuous with digital synovial sheath of the 
thumb.
N.B.
The radial bursa is usually a separate from that of ulnar 
bursa but may communicate with ulnar bursa deep to flexor 
retinaculum.
Digital Synovial Sheaths (Figs 11.9 and 11.10)
The flexor tendons of digits while passing through the fibrous 
flexor sheaths are enclosed in the synovial sheath. The digital 
synovial sheath extends from head of metacarpals to the distal 
phalanges of the digits.
N.B.
• The digital synovial sheath of the little finger is continuous 
with the ulnar bursa.
• The digital synovial sheath of the thumb is continuous 
with the radial bursa.
• Parts of long flexor tendons of the index, middle, and 
ring fingers between the ulnar bursa and digital synovial 
sheaths are devoid of synovial sheaths.
Functions
Function of the ulnar and radial bursae, and digital synovial 
sheaths is to allow the long tendons of digits to move freely/
smoothly with minimum friction beneath flexor retinacu-
lum and fibrous flexor sheaths.
Vincula Longa and Vincula Brevia (Fig. 11.11)
As the tendons lie within the fibrous flexor sheaths, they are 
connected to the phalanges by the thin bands of connective 
tissue, called vincula. In each digital sheath, there are five 
vincula—two short and three long. The short ones are called 
vincula brevia and long ones vincula longa. The vincula 
brevia are small triangular bands attached to the palmar 
aspect of the IP joints and distal part of adjoining proximal 
phalanx. The vincula longa are long, narrow band, which 
extend from the dorsal aspect of the tendon to the proximal 
part of the palmar surface of the proximal phalanx. The 
blood vessels reach the tendons through these vincula.
Tenosynovitis of the synovial sheaths of the flexor 
tendons: It is the infection and inflammation of the synovial 
sheaths of long flexor tendons, which mostly result from 
small penetrating wounds caused by pin prick or insertion of 
thorn. The infection of digital synovial sheaths results in the 
distension of sheath with pus. The digit gets swollen and 
becomes very painful due to stretching of sheath by pus. 
The infection may extend from digital synovial sheaths to the 
palmar spaces.
In case of infection of digital synovial sheaths of little 
finger and thumb, the infection may quickly reach into ulnar 
and radial bursae due to their continuity, if these bursae are 
involved and neglected. The proximal ends of these bursae 
may burst and pus may enter into the fascial space of 
forearm (space of Parona) between flexor digitorum 
profundus anteriorly and interosseous membrane and 
pronator quadratus posteriorly.
Clinical correlation
INTRINSIC MUSCLES OF THE HAND
These are short muscles whose origin and insertion is 
confined within the territory of the hand. They are 
responsible for skilled movements of the hand and also 
help the hand in adjusting for proper gripping. There are 
20 intrinsic muscles in hand. They have small motor units; 
hence can act with precision to carry out skilled 
movements.
The intrinsic muscles of the hand are arranged into the 
following five groups:
1. Thenar muscles.
2. Adductor of thumb.
3. Hypothenar muscles.
4. Lumbricals.
5. Interossei.
Fig. 11.11 The long flexor tendons of fingers showing 
vincula longa and brevia.
Tendon of flexor
digitorum profundus
Tendon of flexor
digitorum superficialis
Vincula
brevia
Vincula
longa
Vincula
longa
Vincula
brevia
--- Page 159 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
Thenar Muscles (Fig. 11.12)
They are three in number, viz.
1. Abductor pollicis brevis.
2. Flexor pollicis brevis.
3. Opponens pollicis.
Relationship
1. Abductor pollicis brevis lies laterally.
2. Flexor pollicis brevis lies medially.
Opponens pollicis lies deep between the above two 
muscles.
Features
1. They form thenar eminence of palm of the hand.
2. They are chiefly responsible for opposition of thumb.
3. All of them are supplied by the recurrent branch of the 
median nerve (C8, TI).
N.B. The actions of thenar muscles are indicated by their 
names to some extent; but they all are involved in opposition 
providing pincer-like grip between the thumb and index 
finger.
Hypothenar Muscles (Fig. 11.12)
They are also three in number, viz.
1. Abductor digiti minimi.
2. Flexor digiti minimi.
3. Opponens digiti minimi.
Some authorities also consider palmaris brevis (see page 
139) as one of the hypothenar muscles.
Relationship
1. Abductor digiti minimi lies medially.
2. Flexor digiti minimi lies laterally.
Opponens digiti minimi lies deep to the above two muscles.
Features
They form hypothenar eminence of the palm of the 
hand.
2. All of them are supplied by the deep branch of ulnar 
nerve. The origin, insertion, and actions of the thenar 
and hypothenar muscles are presented in Table 11.1.
N.B.
• The flexor pollicis brevis has dual nerve supply: superficial 
head by the median nerve and deep head by the deep 
branch of the ulnar nerve.
• Tendons of insertion of the flexor digiti minimi along with 
the abductor digiti minimi on the medial side of the base 
of first phalanx contain a sesamoid bone.
Adductor Pollicis Muscle (Fig. 11.13)
This fan-shaped muscle is located deep in the palm in 
contact with metacarpal and interossei. It consists of two 
heads: (a) oblique and (b) transverse.
Origin
1. Oblique head arises from anterior aspects of capitate 
bone and bases of second and third metacarpal bones—
forming a crescentic shape.
2. Transverse head arises from ridge on distal two-third of 
the anterior surface of the shaft of the third metacarpal.
Insertion
Into the medial side of the base of proximal phalanx of the 
thumb.
Nerve supply
Deep branch of the ulnar nerve (C8, TI).
Actions
Adduction of the thumb to provide power to the grip.
N.B.
• The tendons of insertion of adductor pollicis on the 
medial side of the base of proximal phalanx of the thumb 
contain a sesamoid bone.
• The deep palmar arch and deep branch of ulnar nerve 
pass between the two heads of adductor pollicis.
Clinical testing (Foment’s sign)
Give the patient a thin book and ask him to grasp it firmly 
between the thumbs and index fingers of both hands. If the 
muscle is healthy and acting normally, the thumbs will be 
straight. But if the muscle is paralyzed and not acting, the thumbs 
are flexed at IP joints (Fig. 13.4). This occurs because when 
adductors are not acting, flexor pollicis compensates for it.
Lumbrical Muscles (Fig. 11.14)
There are four lumbrical muscles and numbered first, 
second, third, and fourth from lateral to medial side. They 
are small slender muscles one for each digit. They are named 
lumbricals because of their elongated worm-like shape 
(L. lumbrical  earthworm).
Origin
1. Lumbricals 1 and 2: From lateral side of lateral two 
tendons of the flexor digitorum profundus.
2. Lumbricals 3 and 4: From adjacent sides of medial three 
tendons of the flexor digitorum profundus.
Insertion
The tendons cross the radial side of metacarpophalangeal 
(MP) joints to be inserted into the lateral side of dorsal 
digital expansion of the corresponding digit from second to 
fifth.
--- Page 161 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
Table 11.1 Origin, insertion, and actions of the thenar and hypothenar muscles
Muscles
Origin
Insertion
Action
Thenar muscles
Abductor pollicis brevis
• Tubercle of scaphoid
• Crest of trapezium
• Flexor retinaculum
Lateral side of base of the proximal 
phalanx of thumb
Abduction of thumb
Flexor pollicis brevis
• Superficial head from the 
distal border of the flexor 
retinaculum
• Deep head from trapezoid 
and capitate bones
Lateral side of the base of the 
proximal phalanx of thumb
Flexion of thumb
Opponens pollicis
• Flexor retinaculum crest of 
trapezium
Lateral border and adjoining lateral 
half of the palmar surface of the first 
metacarpal bone
• Opposition of thumb
• Deepens the hollow of palm
Hypothenar muscles
Abductor digiti minimi
• Pisiform bone
• Tendon of flexor carpi 
ulnaris
Ulnar side of the base of the proximal 
phalanx of little finger
Abduction of little finger
Flexor digiti minimi
• Flexor retinaculum
• Hook of hamate
Ulnar side of base of the proximal 
phalanx of little finger along with 
tendon of abductor digiti minimi
Flexion of little finger
Opponens digiti minimi
• Flexor retinaculum 
• Hook of hamate
Medial surface of the shaft of 5th 
metacarpal bone
• Opposition of the tip of little 
finger with the tip of thumb 
• Deepens the hollow of palm
Oblique head
Transverse head
Sesamoid bone
Origin
1. Oblique head from
 
capitate and bases of 
 
2nd and 3rd metacarpals
2. Transverse head from
 
shaft of 3rd metacarpal
Insertion
Medial side of
base of proximal
phalanx
Adductor
pollicis
Fig. 11.13 Origin and insertion of the adductor pollicis muscles.
--- Page 164 ---
Hand
1. Superficial palmar branch of the radial artery (most 
common).
2. Radialis indicis artery.
3. Princeps pollicis artery.
Branches
1. Three common palmar digital arteries go to the 
interdigital clefts between the fingers and each divides 
into two proper digital arteries, which supply their 
adjacent sides. In the interdigital clefts, they are joined 
by the palmar metacarpal arteries.
2. One proper digital artery runs along the medial side of 
the little finger which it supplies.
3. Cutaneous branches to the palm, which supply the skin 
and superficial fascia of the palm.
Relations
Superficial: Palmar aponeurosis.
Deep: 1. Long flexor tendons of FDS and FDP.
 
2. Lumbricals.
 
3. Digital branches of the median and ulnar nerves.
Surface Anatomy
The superficial palmar arch lies across the centre of the palm 
at the level of the distal border of the fully extended thumb.
Deep Palmar Arch (Fig. 11.17)
The deep palmar arch is the direct continuation of radial 
artery. The arch is completed medially (at the base of the 
fifth metacarpal) by anastomosing with the deep palmar 
branch of the ulnar artery.
The radial artery enters the palm from dorsal aspect of the 
hand by passing between the two heads of first dorsal 
interosseous muscle. Immediately after entering the palm, 
the radial artery gives off two branches: arteria radialis indicis 
and arteria princeps pollicis. In the palm, it passes between 
the two heads of adductor pollicis.
Branches
1. Three palmar metacarpal arteries, which join the 
common palmar digital arteries, the branches of the 
superficial palmar arch.
2. Three perforating arteries, which pass through the 2nd, 
3rd, and 4th interosseous spaces to anastomose with 
dorsal metacarpal arteries.
3. Recurrent branch/branches run proximally in front of 
carpus to end in the palmar carpal arch.
Relations
Deep:
(a) Proximal parts of shafts of the metacarpals.
(b) Interosseous muscles.
Superficial:
(a) Long flexor tendons of the fingers.
(b) Lumbricals.
N.B. The deep branch of the ulnar nerve lies in the concavity 
of deep palmar arch.
Surface Anatomy
The deep palmar arch lies about 1 cm proximal to the 
superficial palmar arch.
The differences between the superficial and deep palmar 
(arterial) arches are given in Table 11.4.
Table 11.3 Differences between the palmar and dorsal interossei
Features
Palmar interossei
Dorsal interossei
Location
On the palmar surface between the metacarpals
Between the metacarpals
Type
Unipennate
Bipennate
Origin
From palmar aspects of the metacarpals
From side of metacarpals
Action
Adduction of digits
Abduction of digits
Ulnar artery
Radial artery
Superficial palmar
branch of
radial artery
Deep palmar
branch of
ulnar artery
Deep palmar
arch
Superficial
palmar arch
Radialis indicis
artery
Palmar
metacarpal
artery
Princeps
pollicis artery
Fig. 11.17 Superficial and deep palmar arterial arches.
--- Page 165 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
Laceration of palmar arterial arches: The lacerated 
wounds of palmar arterial arches usually cause profuse and 
uncontrollable bleeding. The compression of brachial artery 
against humerus is the most effective method to control the 
bleeding.
The ligation or clamping of the radial artery or ulnar artery 
or both proximal to wrist fails to control the bleeding because 
of connections of these arches with the palmar and dorsal 
carpal arches.
Clinical correlation
NERVES IN THE PALM OF THE HAND
There are two nerves in the palm of the hand, viz.
1. Ulnar nerve.
2. Median nerve.
N.B. The ulnar nerve is the main motor nerve of the hand, 
whereas median nerve is the main sensory nerve of the 
hand.
Ulnar Nerve (Figs 11.18 and 11.19)
The ulnar nerve enters the palm by passing superficial to the 
flexor retinaculum between the pisiform bone and ulnar 
artery. At the distal border of flexor retinaculum it divides 
into superficial and deep terminal branches.
Superficial Branch
It enters the palm deep to palmaris brevis, which it supplies 
and then divides into digital branches. The digital nerves 
supply the skin of the medial 1½ finger. The digital nerves 
cross over the tips of digits and supply the skin on the 
dorsum of distal phalanges. The superficial branch of the 
ulnar nerve is accompanied by the superficial branch of the 
ulnar artery.
Deep Branch
It dips in the interval between abductor digiti minimi and 
flexor digiti minimi muscles, then pierces opponens digiti 
minimi to reach the deep part of the palm. It turns laterally 
within the concavity of the deep palmar arch to end by 
supplying the adductor pollicis.
The deep branch supplies:
 
 Muscular branches to
– three hypothenar muscles,
– adductor pollicis,
– four dorsal interosseous muscles,
– four palmar interosseous muscles, and
– medial two lumbricals.
 
 Articular branches to intercarpal, carpometacarpal, and 
intermetacarpal joints.
The distribution of ulnar nerve in the hand is summarized in 
Table 11.5.
N.B. The ulnar nerve supplies all the intrinsic muscles of the 
hand (except thenar muscles and lateral two lumbricals), 
which are concerned with fine movements of the hand as 
performed by musicians. Hence ulnar nerve is also termed 
musician’s nerve.
Ulnar canal syndrome/Guyon’s tunnel syndrome: It is 
clinical condition, which occurs due to compression of the 
ulnar nerve in Guyon’s canal* at wrist. Clinically it presents 
(a) Hypoesthesia in medial 1½ fingers, and
(b) Weakness of intrinsic muscles of hand.
*Ulnar tunnel/Guyon’s canal is an osseofibrous tunnel formed by 
the pisohamate ligament bridging the concavity between pisiform 
bone and hook of hamate.
Clinical correlation
Median Nerve (Fig. 11.19)
The median nerve enters the hand by passing through the 
carpal tunnel, (i.e., deep to flexor retinaculum) along with 
nine tendons (four each of FDS and FDF and one of FPL). 
Just after emerging from carpal tunnel it divides into lateral 
and medial divisions.
Table 11.4 Differences between the superficial and deep palmar arches
Superficial palmar arch 
Deep palmar arch
Formation
By anastomosis between direct continuation of the ulnar 
artery (i.e., superficial palmar branch) with the small 
superficial branch of the radial artery
By anastomosis between direct continuation of the 
radial artery with the small deep palmar branch of the 
ulnar artery 
Location
Superficial to long flexor tendons
Deep to long flexor tendons
Branches
• Three common palmar digital arteries
• One proper digital artery
• Cutaneous branches
• Three palmar metacarpal arteries
• Three perforating arteries
• Recurrent branches
--- Page 166 ---
Hand
Lateral division gives off:
(a) recurrent branch, which curls upwards to supply thenar 
muscles (e.g., abductor pollicis brevis, flexor pollicis 
brevis, and opponens pollicis) and
(b) three proper palmar digital branches, which provides 
sensory innervation to thumb and lateral side to the 
index finger. The digital branch to the index finger sends 
a twig to the first lumbrical.
Medial division gives off:
Two common digital nerves, which provides sensory 
innervation to the medial side of the index finger, middle 
finger, and lateral side of the ring finger. The lateral com-
mon digital nerve sends a twig to second lumbrical.
The distribution of median nerve in hand is summarized 
in Table 11.6.
FASCIAL SPACES OF THE HAND
By virtue of the arrangement of various fascia and fascial 
septa, many fascial spaces are formed in the region of the 
hand. Normally they are potential spaces filled with loose 
connective tissue but they become obvious only when 
fluid or pus collects in them. These spaces are of great sur-
Fig. 11.18 Course and distribution of the ulnar nerve in hand.
Tendon of flexor
carpi ulnaris
Dorsal cutaneous branch
for medial skin of the dorsum
of hand and 1½ digits
Pisiform bone
Superficial branch
Deep branch
Palmaris brevis
Ulnar artery
Flexor digiti minimi
Abductor digiti minimi
Opponens digiti minimi
Medial, 2 lumbricals
3 palmar interossei
4 dorsal interossei
Adductor pollicis
Palmar cutaneous branch
to medial skin of palm
Flexor pollicis
brevis (often)
Superficial terminal branch
to palmar aspect of 1½ digits
Fig. 11.19 Median and ulnar nerves in hand: A, branches; B, areas of sensory innervation of the palmar aspect of the hand.
Ulnar nerve
Deep branch
Superficial branch
Nerve to
palmaris brevis
Median nerve
Recurrent branch
Nerve to 1st
lumbrical
Nerve to 2nd
lumbrical
Ulnar nerve
Median
nerve
--- Page 168 ---
Hand
Midpalmar Space (Fig. 11.21)
The triangular midpalmar space is located under the medial 
half of hollow of the palm.
Boundaries
Anterior: 
From superficial to deep, it is formed by:
 
1. Palmar aponeurosis.
 
2. Superficial palmar arch.
 
3. Digital nerve and vessels supplying medial 
3½ fingers.
 
4. Ulnar bursa enclosing flexor tendons of 
medial three fingers.
 
5. Medial three (2nd, 3rd, and 4th) lumbricals.
Posterior: Fascia covering interossei and medial three 
metacarpals.
Lateral: 
 Intermediate palmar septum extending obliquely 
from near the medial edge of the palmar 
aponeurosis to the third metacarpal bone. This 
septum separates the midpalmar space from the 
thenar space.
Medial: 
 Medial palmar septum extending from medial 
edge of palmar aponeurosis to the fifth metacarpal. 
This septum separates the midpalmar space from 
hypothenar space occupied by the hypothenar 
muscles.
Proximal: Midpalmar space is continuous with the forearm 
space of Parona.
Distal: 
 Midpalmar space is continuous with the medial 
three web-spaces through medial three lumbrical 
canals.
N.B. 
Web spaces: The web space is a subcutaneous space in 
each interdigital cleft and is filled with loose areolar tissue. It 
contains lumbrical tendon, interosseous tendon, digital 
nerve, and vessels.
The web space extends from the free margin of the web, 
as far proximally as the level of transverse metacarpal 
ligaments.
Infection of midpalmar space: The ulnar bursa is 
considered as the inlet for infection and lumbrical canals as 
the outlets of infection in midpalmar space. The pus form 
this space is drained by incisions in the medial two web 
spaces.
Clinical correlation
Thenar Space (Fig. 11.21)
The triangular thenar space is located under the outer half of 
the hollow of the palm.
Boundaries
Anterior: From superficial to deep, it is formed by:
 
1. Palmar aponeurosis (lateral part).
 
2. Digital nerve and vessels of lateral 1½ digits.
 
3. Radial bursa enclosing tendon of flexor 
pollicis longus.
 
4. Flexor tendons of the index finger.
 
5. First lumbrical.
Lateral: 
 Lateral palmar septum extending from lateral edge 
of palmar aponeurosis to the first metacarpal.
Fig. 11.21 Cross section of the hand showing palmar spaces and spaces on the dorsum of the hand.
Palmar aponeurosis
Flexor tendons to
middle, ring and little fingers
Medial palmar septum
Hypothenar muscles
Midpalmar space
Thenar muscles
Flexor tendon to index finger
Tendon of flexor
pollicis longus
Lateral palmar septum
Intermediate palmar septum
Superficial palmar arch
Thenar space
Adductor pollicis
Dorsal subaponeurotic space
Dorsal subcutaneous space
Fifth metacarpal
First metacarpal
--- Page 169 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
Medial: 
Intermediate palmar septum.
Posterior: Fascia covering the transverse head of adductor 
pollicis.
Proximal: The space is limited by the fusion of anterior and 
posterior walls in the carpal tunnel.
Distal: 
 The space communicates with the first web space 
through the first lumbrical canal.
Infection of thenar space: The infection may reach the 
thenar space from infected radial bursa or synovial sheath 
of the index finger.
The pus from thenar space is drained by an incision in the 
first web space (web space of the thumb).
Clinical correlation
The midpalmar and thenar spaces and their surface 
projection in the palm are shown in Figure 11.22.
PULP SPACES OF THE DIGITS (Fig. 11.23)
The pulp spaces of the digits are subcutaneous spaces on the 
palmar side of tips of the fingers and thumb. The pulp space 
is filled with subcutaneous fatty tissue.
Boundaries
Superficially: Skin and superficial fascia.
Deeply: Distal two-third of distal phalanx.
Features
1. The space is traversed by numerous fibrous septa 
extending from skin to the periosteum of the terminal 
phalanx, dividing it into many loculi.
2. The deep fascia of pulp of each finger fuses with the 
periosteum of terminal phalanx distal to the insertion of 
long flexor tendon.
3. The digital artery that supplies the diaphysis of phalanx 
runs through this space. The epiphysis of distal phalanx 
receives its blood supply proximal to the pulp space.
Pulp space infection: Being the most exposed parts of the 
digits the pulp spaces are prone for infection. An abscess in 
the pulp-space is called whitlow or felon. The rising tension 
in the pulp space causes severe throbbing pain. The pus 
from pulp space is drained by a lateral incision, opening all 
loculi and avoiding tactile skin sensation on the front of the 
finger.
If neglected, the whitlow may lead to avascular necrosis 
of distal four-fifth of the terminal phalanx due to occlusion of 
digital artery as result of pressure. The proximal one-fifth 
phalanx (i.e., epiphysis) is not affected because the branch 
of digital artery supplying it does not traverse the pulp 
space.
Clinical correlation
Dorsal Surfaces
These are described on p. 172.
Space of Parona (Forearm space; Fig. 11.24)
It is merely a fascial interval underneath the flexor tendons 
on the front of distal part of the forearm.
Boundaries
Anterior: 
(a) Tendon of flexor digitorum profundus and 
flexor digitorum superficialis surrounded 
by a synovial sheath (ulnar bursa).
Fig. 11.22 Midpalmar and thenar spaces of the hand and 
their surface projections in the palm.
Adductor pollicis
Thenar space
Palmar
aponeurosis
Midpalmar space
Fig. 11.23 Pulp space of the finger.
Long flexor
tendon
Deep fascia
Digital artery
Fibrous septa
Pulp space
Skin
Terminal phalanx
Epiphysis of terminal phalanx
Nail
--- Page 170 ---
Hand
(b) Tendon of flexor pollicis longus surrounded 
by a synovial bursa (radial bursa).
Proximal: Proximally, it is continuous with the inter-
muscular spaces of the forearm.
Distal: 
Distally it reaches the level of wrist.
Lateral: 
Outer border of the forearm.
Medial: 
Inner border of the forearm.
The forearm space (Parona’s space) becomes infected from 
infected ulnar bursa. Pus collects behind the long flexor 
tendons.
Clinical correlation
Surgical Incisions on the Front of Wrist and 
Hand (Fig. 11.25)
The surgical incisions in the palm should be well-planned 
and given carefully to avoid contractures:
 
 Incisions should be parallel to major skin creases of the 
hand as far as possible.
 
 An incision should not cross the skin crease at a right angle.
Guidelines for some incisions are as follows (Fig. 11.25):
 
 To drain abscess of the thenar space, a vertical incision is 
given in first web space (A).
 
 To drain abscess from midpalmar space, small vertical 
incision should be given in the medial two web spaces 
(B).
 
 To drain abscess from ulnar bursa, incision should be given 
along the radial margin of hypothenar eminence (C).
 
 To drain abscess from radial bursa, incision should be 
given along the medial margin of thenar eminence (D).
 
 To drain pus from digital synovial sheath, vertical incisions 
should be given along the side of proximal and middle 
phalanges (E).
 
 To drain pus from pulp space, vertical incision should be 
given along the sides of pulp (F).
 
 To drain pus from space of Parona, vertical incisions 
should be given on the distal part of forearm (G).
DORSUM OF THE HAND
Surface Landmarks
Knuckles, the bony prominences at the junction of hand 
and digits, which become visible prominently when a fist 
is made. They are produced by the heads of metacarpals.
2. Anatomical snuff-box, a triangular depression, which 
appears on the dorsolateral aspect of the hand when the 
thumb is hyperextended. The pulsations of radial artery 
can be felt in this box. The beginning of cephalic vein 
can also be seen at this site. The tendon of extensor 
pollicis longus forming its posterior boundary and 
tendons of abductor pollicis longus and extensor pollicis 
brevis forming its anterior boundary are clearly visible.
3. Extensor tendons of fingers stand out clearly when the 
wrist is extended and digits are abducted. These tendons 
are not visible far beyond knuckles because they flatten 
here to form extensor expansions.
4. Dorsal venous network is clearly visible and forms the 
prominent feature of the dorsum of hand.
5. Base of first metacarpal (thumb) can be readily felt in 
the angle between the tendons of abductor pollicis 
longus and extensor pollicis longus.
6. Whole of the radial border and most of the dorsal 
surface of the second (index) metacarpal can be readily 
Fig. 11.24 Forearm space (Parona’s space) as seen in 
section along the long axis of the hand.
Long flexor tendon
Ulnar bursa
Pronator
quadratus
Parona’s space
Midpalmar 
space
Digital synovial
shealh
Fig. 11.25 Incisions on the front of wrist and hand for 
draining abscess from: A, thenar space; B, midpalmar space; 
C, ulnar bursa; D, radial bursa; E, digital synovial sheath; 
F, pulp space; G, space of Parona.
--- Page 171 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
Fig. 11.27 Boutonniere (button-hole) deformity. Note 
proximal interphalangeal (PIP) joint is poking through the 
extensor expansion.
Extensor expansion 
Flexed PIP 
Rupture of central portion of
extensor expansion
felt. Its base forms the prominence of the back of the 
hand.
N.B. The dorsal surfaces of metacarpals of the middle, ring, 
and little fingers are obscured by the extensor tendons.
SKIN ON THE DORSUM OF THE HAND
The skin on the dorsum of the hand is thin and loose when 
the hand is relaxed. The hairs are present on the dorsum of 
the hand and on the proximal parts of the digits, especially in 
males.
Superficial Fascia
The superficial fascia on the dorsum of the hand contains 
dorsal venous arch, cutaneous branches of the radial nerve, 
and dorsal cutaneous branch of the ulnar nerve (Fig. 11.20):
Dorsal venous arch is the network of veins on the dorsum 
of the hands. It is already described in Chapter 7, P. 86.
2. Superficial radial nerve (terminal cutaneous branch of 
the radial nerve) is described on page 158.
3. Dorsal cutaneous branch of the ulnar nerve is described 
on page 158.
Deep Fascia
The deep fascia on the back of the wrist is thickened to 
form thick fibrous band—the extensor retinaculum, which 
holds the extensor tendons in place (for details see pages 120 
and 122).
EXTENSOR TENDONS ON THE DORSUM OF THE HAND
The extensor tendons on the dorsum of the hand are as 
follows:
1. Tendons of the thumb: They are three in number; one 
for each bone of the thumb:
(a) Tendon of abductor pollicis longus (APL) is inserted 
on the base of 1st metacarpal.
(b) Tendon of extensor pollicis brevis (EPB) is inserted 
on the base of proximal phalanx.
(c) Tendon of extensor pollicis longus (EPL) is inserted 
on the base of distal phalanx.
2. Tendons of extensor digitorum: These are four in 
number, which diverge across the dorsum of the hand, 
where they are usually connected to one another by 
three oblique fibrous intertendinous bands. The tendons 
are united in such a way as to form with deep fascia an 
aponeurotic sheath, which is attached to the borders of 
the second and fifth metacarpals.
DORSAL DIGITAL EXPANSIONS (Fig. 11.16)
Each tendon of extensor digitorum expands over the 
metacarpophalangeal joint to cover its dorsal aspect and 
sides like a hood and fuses anteriorly with the fibrous flexor 
sheath. The tendons of lumbricals and interossei are inserted 
into this expansion. The expansion narrows as the tendons of 
lumbricals and interossei converge towards it on the dorsum of 
the proximal phalanx and splits into three slips. The central 
slip is inserted into the base of the middle phalanx and the 
lateral slips to the base of terminal phalanx.
N.B.
• The dorsal digital expansion forms a functional unit to 
coordinate the actions of long extensors, long flexors, 
lumbricals and interossei on the digit.
• On the index finger and little finger, the expansion is 
strengthened by extensor indicis and extensor digiti 
minimi, respectively, which blends with it.
• Mallet 
finger/baseball 
finger/cricketer’s 
finger 
(Fig. 11.26): The insertion of extensor tendon into the base 
of the terminal phalanx may be torn by a forceful blow on 
the tip of the finger, which causes sudden and strong 
flexion of the phalanx. Occasionally, small flakes of the 
bone may be avulsed. Consequently the distal phalanx 
assumes a flexed position with swan neck deformity and 
voluntary 
extension 
impossible. This 
condition 
commonly occurs in cricketers and baseball players.
• Boutonnière (button-hole) deformity (Fig. 11.27): It is 
opposite to mallet finger deformity. It is characterized by 
flexion of proximal interphalangeal (PIP) joint and 
hyperextension of distal phalanx. It occurs when the flexed 
PIP joint pokes through the extensor expansion following 
rupture of its central portion of dorsal digital expansion 
due to a direct end on trauma to the finger.
Clinical correlation
Fig. 11.26 Mallet finger with swan neck deformity.
Torn extensor
tendon
--- Page 172 ---
Hand
Fig. 11.28 Boundaries and contents of the anatomical 
snuffbox (S = scaphoid).
First metacarpal
Tendon of extensor
pollicis brevis
Tendon of extensor
pollicis longus
Radial artery
Tendon of abductor
pollicis longus
Fig. 11.29 Structures crossing the roof of anatomical 
snuffbox.
Tendon of extensor
pollicis longus
Tendon of extensor
pollicis brevis
Tendon of abductor
pollicis longus
Cutaneous
branches of
superficial
radial nerve
Extensor
retinaculum
Cephalic vein
Radial artery
Cephalic vein
Superficial branch of
radial nerve
Clinical significance of anatomical snuff box:
• The pulsations of radial artery can be felt in the anatomical 
box.
• The tenderness in the anatomical box indicates fracture of 
scaphoid bone.
• The cephalic vein at this site is often used for giving 
intravenous fluids.
• The superficial branches of the radial nerve can be rolled 
over the tendon of extensor pollicis longus.
Clinical correlation
ARTERIES ON THE DORSUM OF THE HAND
1. Radial artery: The radial artery on leaving the forearm, 
winds round the radial side of the wrist lying on the 
radial collateral ligament. It passes through anatomical 
box, on the dorsal surface of scaphoid and trapezium 
and then passes forward into the palm of the hand by 
passing between the proximal ends of first and second 
metacarpals and two heads of the first dorsal interosse-
ous muscle.
2. Dorsal carpal arch: It is an arterial arch lying on the 
dorsal aspect of the carpus. It is formed by the posterior 
carpal branches of the radial and ulnar arteries, 
respectively.
ANATOMICAL SNUFF-BOX (Figs 11.28 and 11.29)
The anatomical snuff-box is an elongated triangular 
depression seen on the lateral side of the dorsum of hand 
when the thumb is hyperextended.
Boundaries (Fig. 11.28)
Anterolaterally:
1. Tendon of abductor pollicis longus.
2. Tendon of extensor pollicis brevis.
Posteromedially: Tendon of extensor pollicis longus.
Floor: It is formed by 
1. scaphoid and
2. trapezium.
Roof: It is formed by
1. skin and
2. superficial fascia.
Contents: Radial artery.
Structures crossing the roof deep to skin (Fig. 11.29):
1. Cephalic vein, from medial to lateral side.
2. Terminal branches of the superficial radial nerve, from 
lateral to medial side.
--- Page 173 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
 The dorsal carpal arch gives off three dorsal metacarpal 
arteries, each of which terminates by dividing into two 
digital arteries. The digital arteries from three metacarpal 
arteries supply medial 3½ fingers.
3. Dorsal digital artery: The dorsal digital artery for thumb 
(princeps pollicis artery) and dorsal digital artery for 
radial side of the index finger (radialis indicis artery)
arise from radial artery just distal to the origin of its 
dorsal carpal branch.
Nerves of the Dorsum of the Hand (Fig. 11.27)
The nerves of the dorsum of the hand are two, viz.
1. Superficial radial nerve (superficial cutaneous branch of 
the radial nerve).
2. Dorsal cutaneous branch of the ulnar nerve.
Superficial Radial Nerve
The part of radial nerve in hand is its superficial terminal 
branch called superficial radial nerve.
About 7 cm above the wrist, the superficial radial nerve 
passes laterally deep to the tendon of brachioradialis, pierces 
the deep fascia on the dorsal aspect of the wrist to reach the 
dorsum of the hand and immediately divides into 4 or 5 
dorsal digital nerves, which cross the roof of anatomical 
snuff-box and supply the skin over the lateral two-third of 
the dorsum of hand and dorsal aspects of lateral 3½ digits 
except the skin over their distal phalanges.
Dorsal Cutaneous Branch of Ulnar Nerve
It arises from ulnar nerve about 5 cm about the wrist. On 
reaching the hand, it divides into two branches which 
supply the skin of the medial 1½ finger except their distal 
phalanges.
Sensory innervation of the hand
Palmar aspect (Fig. 11.19)
1. Medial one-third of palm and medial 1½ digit except 
dorsal aspect of their distal phalanges by the ulnar nerve.
2. Lateral two-third of palm and lateral 3½ digits including 
dorsal aspect of their distal phalanges by the median 
nerve.
Dorsal aspect (Fig. 11.20)
1. Lateral two-third of dorsum of the hand and lateral 3½ 
digits except distal phalanges by the radial nerve.
2. Medial one-third of dorsum of the hand and medial 1½ 
digit except their distal phalanges by the ulnar nerve.
SPACES ON THE DORSUM OF THE HAND
These are two potential spaces on the dorsum of the hand 
(Fig. 11.29), viz.
1. Dorsal subcutaneous space.
2. Dorsal subaponeurotic space.
Dorsal subcutaneous space: It lies deep to skin on the 
dorsum of the hand.
Dorsal subaponeurotic space: The extensor tendons on the 
dorsum of hand along with deep fascia of the dorsum of 
hand forms an aponeurotic sheet which is attached to the 
borders of the 2nd and 5th metacarpals.
The space between dorsal surface of the medial four 
metacarpals 
interosseous 
muscles 
anteriorly 
aponeurotic sheet (vide supra) posteriorly is called dorsal 
subaponeurotic space.
The dorsal subaponeurotic space is limited proximally 
at the bases of metacarpals and distally at the 
metacarpophalangeal joints by fibrous partitions.
• Infection of subcutaneous space: The infection of 
subcutaneous space is uncommon but sometimes it may 
get infected after injury over the knuckles. Collection of 
pus in this space produces large swelling due to looseness 
of the skin. The pus points through skin and can be 
drained by incision given at the pointing site.
• Infection of subaponeurotic space: The septic infection 
of subaponeurotic space is generally primary, following 
wounds on the dorsum of the hand. It may, however, get 
involved secondarily to the infection of the midpalmar 
space. The pus collected in the subaponeurotic space is 
limited proximally at the bases of metacarpal bones and 
distally at the metacarpophalangeal joints. On each side, 
it is limited opposite the borders of second and fifth 
metacarpal bones. To drain the pus from this space, 
incisions are made in the aponeurosis between the 
tendons distally. Alternatively, two incisions may be made, 
one on the radial side and one along the ulnar side of 
extensor tendons.
Clinical correlation
ARCHES OF THE HAND
Like foot, the hand also has arches. The hand is composed of 
a series of three flexible bony arches. Their preservation 
following an injury is of supreme functional importance to 
the hand.
The arches of the hand are as follows:
1. Transverse carpal arch: It is formed by the concavity of 
the carpus with flexor retinaculum stretching between 
its pillars.
2. Transverse metacarpal arch: It is formed by the heads of 
the metacarpal bones, which are bound together by the 
deep metacarpal ligaments.
3. Longitudinal arch: It is formed by the palmar concavity 
of the metacarpals and normal slightly flexed posture of 
the digits.
--- Page 174 ---
Hand
FUNCTION OF ARCHES
The arches of the hand provide room for grasping objects in 
the hollow of palm.
The more accentuated the arches are, the more secure is 
the grip. The thenar and hypothenar muscles and palmaris 
brevis play an important role in providing adjusting power 
of the arches.
Abnormalities of arches of the hand: The disturbances 
of palmar arches result in flat hand with impairment of 
gripping power. The flattening of carpal arch seriously 
affects the gripping power of the thumb. It occurs due to 
surgical division of flexor retinaculum or injury to the 
carpus.
Clinical correlation
--- Page 176 ---
Joints and Movements of 
the Hand
CHAPTER
JOINTS OF WRIST, HAND, AND FINGERS
The hand is the region of the upper limb distal to the wrist 
joint. It consists of three parts: (a) wrist, (b) metacarpus, and 
(c) digits.
The study of joints of hand is essential to understand the 
various movements of the hand. Of these, radio-carpal 
(wrist) and first carpometacarpal joints need to be studied in 
detail as they execute wide range of movements.
WRIST JOINT (RADIO-CARPAL JOINT; Fig. 12.1)
Type
The wrist joint is a synovial joint of ellipsoid variety between 
lower end of radius and carpus.
Fig. 12.1 Coronal section through wrist region: A, schematic diagram; B, as seen in magnetic resonance imaging, showing 
wrist joint, midcarpal joint, intercarpal joints, carpometacarpal joints. (Source B: Fig. 7.91C, Page 710, Gray's Anatomy for 
Students, Richard L Drake, Wayne Vogl, Adam WM Mitchell. Copyright Elsevier Inc. 2005, All rights reserved.)
Articular surfaces
1. Proximal articular surface is formed by inferior 
surface of the lower end of radius and inferior surface 
of the triangular articular disc of inferior radio-ulnar 
joint.
This articular surface is almost elliptical in shape and 
concave from side to side.
2. Distal articular surface is formed by the proximal 
surfaces of scaphoid, triquetral, and lunate bones. It is 
smooth and convex.
N.B.
• Although wrist joint is an articulation between forearm 
and hand, the medial bone of forearm — the ulna is 
excluded from this articulation by an articular disc.
Wrist joint
Ulna
Midcarpal
joint
Radial collateral
ligament
Articular disc
First
carpometa-
carpal joint
First
metacarpal
Fifth
metacarpal
Radius
Radius
Scaphoid
Lunate
Ulna
Articular disc
Triquetral
--- Page 178 ---
Joints and Movements of the Hand
2. Anterior interosseous artery.
3. Anterior interosseous nerve.
Lateral
1. Radial artery (across the radial collateral ligament).
2. Tendon of abductor pollicis longus (APL).
3. Tendon of extensor pollicis brevis (EPB).
Medial: Dorsal cutaneous branch of ulnar nerve.
Movements
It is a biaxial joint and permits the following movements:
1. Flexion.
2. Extension.
3. Abduction.
4. Adduction.
5. Circumduction.
Flexion and extension occur along the transverse axis, and 
abduction and adduction occur along the anteroposterior 
axis.
N.B.
• The movements at the wrist joint are usually associated 
with movements at the midcarpal joint (joint between the 
proximal and distal rows of carpal bones). The wrist and 
midcarpal joints together are considered as link joint.
• Rotation is not possible at the wrist joint because the 
articular surfaces are ellipsoid in shape. The lack of 
rotation at wrist is compensated by the movements of 
pronation and supination of the forearm.
• The wrist complex consists of radio-carpal joint and 
midcarpal joint.
The movements at the wrist joint and muscles producing 
them are listed in Table 12.1 (also see Flowchart 12.1).
Table 12.1 Movements at the wrist joint and muscles 
producing them
Movement
Muscles
Flexion (upward 
bending of the wrist)
• Flexor carpi radialis (FCR)
• Flexor carpi ulnaris (FCU)
• Palmaris longus (PL)
Extension (backward 
bending of the wrist)
• Extensor carpi radialis longus 
(ECRL)
• Extensor carpi radialis brevis 
(ECRB)
• Extensor carpi ulnaris (ECU)
Abduction (lateral 
bending of the wrist)
• Flexor carpi radialis (FCR)
• Extensor carpi radialis longus 
(ECRL)
• Extensor carpi radialis brevis 
(ECRB)
• Abductor pollicis longus (APL)
Adduction (medial 
bending of the wrist)
• Flexor carpi ulnaris (FCU)
• Extensor carpi ulnaris (ECU)
Fig. 12.3 Relations of the right wrist joint (A = articular disc, M = medial (ulnar) collateral ligament, L = lateral (radial) 
collateral ligament).
Flexor carpi radialis
Radial artery
Abductor pollicis longus
Extensor pollicis brevis 
Extensor carpi
radialis longus
Extensor carpi radialis brevis
Extensor pollicis longus
Cephalic vein 
Posterior interosseous nerve 
Anterior interosseous artery
Tendons of extensor digitorum 
Tendon of extensor indicis 
Basilic vein
Extensor digiti minimi
Extensor carpi ulnaris 
Dorsal cutaneous
branch of ulnar nerve
Ulnar nerve
Ulnar artery 
Flexor carpi ulnaris
Palmaris longus
Median nerve
Tendon of flexor
pollicis longus
Tendons of flexor
digitorum profundus
Tendons of flexor
digitorum superficialis
Radial articular
surface
--- Page 179 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
N.B.
• Flexion is assisted by long flexor tendons of digits (e.g., 
FDS, FDP, and FPL). It occurs more at the midcarpal joint 
than at the wrist joint.
• Extension is assisted by extensors of the digits (e.g., 
extensor digitorum, extensor digiti minimi, and extensor 
indicis). It occurs more at wrist than at midcarpal joint.
• Abduction occurs more at midcarpal joint than the wrist 
joint.
• Adduction mainly occurs at wrist joint. 
• Flexion and extension of the hand are actually initiated at 
the midcarpal joint.
Range of movements (Fig. 12.4)
The range of movements (ROM) of the wrist joint is given in 
the box below:
Range of movements of the wrist joint
Movement
Range
Flexion
0–60°
Extension
0–50°
Abduction
0–15°
Adduction
0–50°
• Superficial positions of nerves, vessels, and tendons at 
wrist make them exceedingly vulnerable to injury.
• Ganglion (Gk = swelling or knot): It is a non-tender cystic 
swelling, which sometimes appears on wrist most 
commonly on its dorsal aspect. Its size varies from a small 
grape to a plum. It usually occurs due to mucoid 
degeneration of synovial sheath around the tendon. The 
cyst is thin walled and contains clear mucinous fluid. The 
flexion of wrist makes the cyst to enlarge and it may 
become painful.
• Aspiration of the wrist joint: It is usually done by 
introducing the needle posteriorly, immediately below the 
styloid process of ulna between the tendons of extensor 
pollicis longus and extensor indicis.
• Immobilization of the wrist joint: The wrist joint is 
immobilized in its optimum position of 30° dorsiflexion.
Clinical correlation
JOINTS OF THE HAND
The joints of hand are:
1. Intercarpal joints.
2. Midcarpal joint.
Flowchart 12.1 Muscles producing various movements of the wrist.
• Flexor carpi radialis 
• Flexor carpi ulnaris 
• Palmaris longus 
Flexion
Adduction
 
Abduction
Extension
Joint 
• Flexor carpi radialis 
• Extensor carpi radialis longus
• Extensor carpi radialis brevis 
• Abductor pollicis longus 
 
• Flexor carpi ulnaris
• Extensor carpi ulnaris 
• Extensor carpi radialis longus 
• Extensor carpi radialis brevis 
• Extensor carpi ulnaris 
0–15°
0–50°
0–50°
0–60°
Fig. 12.4 Range of movements of the wrist joint.
--- Page 180 ---
Joints and Movements of the Hand
3. Carpometacarpal joints.
4. Intermetacarpal joints.
Intercarpal joints: These are plane type of synovial joints, 
which interconnect the carpal bones. They include the 
following joints:
1. Joints between the carpal bones of the proximal row.
2. Joints between the carpal bones of the distal row.
3. Midcarpal joint between the proximal and distal rows of 
the carpal bones.
4. Pisotriquetral joint formed between pisiform and 
palmar surface of triquetral bone.
Carpometacarpal joints: The carpometacarpal joints are 
plane type of synovial joints except for the carpometacarpal 
joint of the thumb, which is a saddle joint. The distal 
surfaces of the carpals of distal row articulate with the bases 
metacarpals. 
Functionally 
clinically, 
first 
carpometacarpal 
joint 
most 
important 
carpometacarpal joint and hence described in detail latter.
Intermetacarpal joints: These are plane type of synovial 
joints and formed by the articulation of the bases of adjacent 
metacarpals of the fingers.
N.B. Joint cavities of intercarpal, carpometacarpal, and 
intermetacarpal joints: There are the following three joint 
cavities among the above-mentioned joints (Fig. 12.1):
1. A continuous common cavity of all intercarpal and meta-
carpal joints, except that of first carpometacarpal joint.
2. Cavity of first carpometacarpal joint.
3. Cavity of pisotriquetral joint.
Movements of the intercarpal and carpometacarpal joints 
are listed in Table 12.2.
First Carpometacarpal Joint (Fig. 12.1)
Type 
It is synovial joint of saddle variety.
Articular surfaces
Proximal: Distal surface of the trapezium.
Distal: Proximal surface of the base of 1st metacarpal.
Both proximal and distal articular surfaces are reciprocally 
concavo-convex; hence permit wide range of movements at 
this joint.
Ligaments
1. Capsular ligament (joint capsule): It is thick loose 
fibrous sac, which encloses the joint cavity. It is attached 
proximally to the margins of articular surface of the 
trapezium and distally to the circumference of the base 
of first metacarpal bone. The inner surface of the capsule 
is lined by the synovial membrane.
2. Lateral ligament: It is a broad fibrous band stretching 
from lateral surface of the trapezium to the lateral side 
of the base of 1st metacarpal bone.
3. Anterior (palmar) ligament: It extends obliquely from 
palmar surface of trapezium to the ulnar side of the base 
of 1st metacarpal.
4. Posterior (dorsal) ligament: It also extends obliquely 
from dorsal surface of trapezium to the ulnar side of the 
base of 1st metacarpal.
Relations
The joints are surrounded by various muscles and tendons 
of the thumb. In addition, it is related to:
(a) radial artery on its posteromedial sides.
(b) First dorsal interosseous muscle on its medial side.
Blood supply
By radial artery.
Nerve supply
By median nerve.
Movements
The various movements, which take place at the first 
carpometacarpal joint are as follows:
1. Flexion and extension.
2. Abduction and adduction.
3. Opposition.
4. Medial and lateral rotation.
5. Circumduction.
The various movements of thumb at first carpometacarpal 
joint are described in detail on pages 168 and 169.
JOINTS OF THE DIGITS (Fig. 12.5)
The joints of digits are:
1. Metacarpophalangeal joints.
2. Interphalangeal joints.
Table 12.2 Movements at the intercarpal, carpometacarpal 
(except first), metacarpophalangeal, and interphalangeal 
joints
Joints
Movements
Intercarpal (IC) joints
Gliding movements
Carpometacarpal (CM) joints
• CM joint of thumb
• CM joints of second and third 
fingers
• CM joint of fourth finger
• CM joint of fifth finger
Freely mobile
Almost no moment
Slightly mobile
Moderately mobile
--- Page 181 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
Metacarpophalangeal (MP) joints (Fig. 12.5A)
Type: They are synovial joints of ellipsoid/condylar variety.
Articular surfaces: They are formed by heads of metacarpals 
and bases of proximal phalanges.
Ligaments
1. Palmar ligaments: 
palmar 
ligament 
fibrocartilaginous plate, which is more firmly attached 
to the phalanx than to the metacarpal. The palmar 
ligaments of second, third, fourth, and fifth MP joints 
are joined to each other by deep transverse metacarpal 
ligament.
2. Medial and lateral collateral ligaments: These are cord- 
like fibrous bands present on each side of the joint and 
extend from head of metacarpal to the base of phalanx.
Movements
 
 Flexion and extension
 
 Adduction and abduction
 
 Circumduction
 
 Limited rotation
Interphalangeal (IP) joints (Fig. 12.5B): Both proximal and 
distal interphalangeal (PIP and DIP) joints are synovial 
joints of hinge variety. Their structure is similar to that of 
MP joints.
Movements
 
 Flexion and extension
MOVEMENTS OF THE HAND
To perform the various movements, the hand adopts a 
specific posture. Hence students must first understand the 
positions of hand at rest and during function.
POSITION OF THE HAND
Position of the hand at rest (Fig. 12.6)
It is the posture adopted by the hand when it is at rest (i.e., 
not performing any action).
The characteristic features of this position are:
1. Forearm is in semiprone position.
2. Wrist joint is slightly extended.
3. Fingers are partially flexed (index finger is not flexed as 
much as the other fingers).
MP joint
Palmar
ligament
Extensor
tendon
Collateral
ligaments
PIP joint
DIP joint
Deep transverse
ligament
Palmar ligament
Fig. 12.5 Joints of the fingers: A, MP joints showing palmar and deep transverse ligaments; B, MP, PIP, and DIP joints 
showing palmar and collateral ligaments (DIP = distal interphalangeal, PIP = proximal interphalangeal, MP = 
metacarpophalangeal).
--- Page 183 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
FUNCTIONAL COMPONENTS OF THE HAND
The hand consists of the following three functional 
components (Fig. 12.9):
1. Central fixed component (central back bone).
2. Radial mobile component.
3. Ulnar mobile component.
The central fixed component is formed by the metacarpals 
of index and middle fingers.
The mobile radial component is formed by the thumb.
The mobile ulnar component is formed by the ring and 
little fingers.
N.B. The mobile radial component (thumb) comes into play 
in precision manipulations against the index finger:
• The thumb, index finger, and middle finger together form 
the so-called radial digital tripod.
• The mobile ulnar component is termed ulnar hook,
which provides for stable power grip with palm or in 
‘hook grip’.
• The little finger is important for power grip whereas 
thumb is important for both power and precision grip.
MOVEMENTS OF THE THUMB
The metacarpal of the thumb (i.e., first metacarpal) does not 
lie in the same plane as the metacarpals of the fingers, but 
occupies a more anterior position (Fig. 12.10). In addition, it 
is rotated medially through 90°, and as a result its extensor 
surface is directed laterally and not backwards. For this 
reason, the movements of the thumb occur in planes at right 
angles to the planes of the corresponding movements of the 
fingers. The movements of thumb occur at carpometacarpal, 
metacarpophalangeal, and interphalangeal joints. The 
movements at the carpometacarpal joint of thumb are much 
freer than that of any other finger.
The various movements of thumb are (Fig. 12.11):
1. Flexion.
2. Extension.
3. Abduction.
4. Adduction.
5. Opposition.
6. Circumduction.
The movements of thumb, plane of movements, and 
muscles producing them are enumerated in the Table 12.3.
N.B. In addition to movements mentioned in Table 12.3, 
the following movements of thumb also take place:
• Circumduction, a combination of flexion, extension, 
abduction, and adduction.
• Medial and lateral rotation, which occurs along the long 
axis. Medial rotation is produced by opponens and 
flexors and lateral rotation by extensors.
MOVEMENTS OF THE FINGERS
The movements of fingers occur at metacarpophalangeal 
(MP) and proximal interphalangeal and distal interphalangeal 
(PIP and DIP) joints. The movements of fingers are:
1. Flexion and extension.
2. Abduction and adduction.
Ulnar mobile
component
Radial mobile
component
Central fixed
component
Fig. 12.9 Functional components of the hand.
Abduction 
Adduction
Extension 
Flexion 
Fig. 12.10 Position of the metacarpals.
--- Page 184 ---
Joints and Movements of the Hand
Fig. 12.11 Movements of the thumb.
Movement of thumb
Movement of thumb
Thumb
Palm
Palm
Flexion of
thumb
Extension of
thumb
In the plane of palm
Abduction
Adduction
At right angle to the
plane of palm
Adduction of thumb
Abduction of thumb
Opposition of thumb
Planes of movements
of thumb
Palm
Across the plane of palm 
The movements of finger are given in Table 12.4.
Flexion: It is a forward movement of fingers in the 
anteroposterior plane and occurs at MP, PIP, and DIP joints.
Extension: It is a backward movement of finger in the 
anteroposterior plane and occurs at MP, PIP, and DIP joints.
Abduction: It is a away movement of finger from the 
imaginary midline of the middle finger and occurs at MP 
joint.
Adduction: It is movement of fingers towards the imaginary 
midline of the middle finger and occurs at MP joint.
N.B. The movements of abduction and adduction fingers 
are possible only when fingers are in extended position 
because in this position the collateral ligaments of MP joints 
are slack. In flexed position of fingers the collateral ligaments 
of MP joint are taut.
The movements of fingers and muscles producing them 
are given in the Table 12.4.
--- Page 185 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
Fig. 12.13 Position of arthrodesis (MP = metacarpophalan-
geal joint, IP = interphalangeal joint).
• Position of immobilization (Fig. 12.12): The collateral 
ligaments of the metacarpophalangeal and interphalangeal 
joints extend from the side of the head of proximal bone to 
the side of base of the distal bone. The ligaments of MP 
joints are on full stretch only when the joint is fully flexed to 
90°; on the other hand, ligaments of IP joint are stretched/
taut only when the joint is fully extended. This knowledge is 
of vital importance when immobilizing the hand because 
contracture of the joints occurs within two weeks, if the 
joints are immobilized when the ligaments are lax/slack. 
Then the shortening of ligaments will cause irreversible 
joint contractures. Therefore, the position of immobilization 
of hand should be such that the MP joints are fully flexed 
and the interphalangeal joints are fully extended.
• Position of arthrodesis* (Fig. 12.13): The position of 
arthrodesis is one, in which wrist joint is moderately 
dorsiflexed (15–20°), and the MP and IP joint are set in 
neutral position.
*Arthrodesis is a surgical procedure consisting of the 
obliteration of a joint space by doing bony fusion so that no 
movement can occur at the joint.
Clinical correlation
Table 12.3 Movements of the thumb, their plane, and muscles producing them
Movement
Plane of movement
Muscles producing movement
Flexion
Occurs in the plane of palm
• Flexor pollicis longus (FPL)
• Flexor pollicis brevis (FPB)
• Opponens pollicis
Extension
Occurs in the plane of palm
• Extensor pollicis longus (EPL)
• Extensor pollicis brevis (EPB)
Abduction
Occurs at right angle to the plane of palm 
(i.e., anteroposterior plane) away from palm
• Abductor pollicis longus (APL)
• Abductor pollicis brevis (APB)
Adduction
Occurs at right angle to the plane of palm 
(i.e., anteroposterior plane) towards the palm
Adductor pollicis
Opposition
Occurs across the palm in such a manner that anterior 
surface of the tip of the thumb comes into contact with 
anterior surface of the tip of any other finger
Opponens pollicis
Fig. 12.12 Position of immobilization (MP = metacarpo-
phalangeal joint, IP = interphalangeal joint).
MP joints fully flexed
IP joints fully
extended
MP and IP joints in
neutral position
Wrist joint moderately flexed
Table 12.4 Movements of the fingers and muscles 
producing them
Movement
Muscles producing them
Flexion
• Flexion of proximal 
phalanx (MP joint)
• Flexion of middle phalanx 
(PIP joint)
• Flexion of distal phalanx 
(DIP joint)
• Lumbricals and interossei
• Flexor digitorum 
superficialis
• Flexor digitorum profundus
Extension
• Extension of proximal 
phalanx (MP joint)
• Flexion of middle and 
distal phalanges (PIP and 
DIP joints)
• Extensor digitorum (in 
addition by extensor indicis 
for index finger and extensor 
digiti minimi for little 
finger)
• Lumbricals and interossei
Abduction 
• Dorsal interossei (abductor 
digiti minimi abducts the 
little finger) 
Adduction
• Palmar interossei
--- Page 187 ---
Major Nerves of the 
Upper Limb
CHAPTER
The nerve supply to the upper lim b is provided by the 
brachial plexus (described in detail in Chapter 5, page 70).
The five major nerves supplying the upper limb are:
1. Axillary nerve.
2. Musculocutaneous nerve.
3. Radial nerve.
4. Median nerve.
5. Ulnar nerve.
The study of five major nerves of the upper limb should 
be studied thoroughly and carefully because of their frequent 
involvement in various injuries and peripheral neuropathy.
AXILLARY NERVE (Fig. 13.1)
The axillary nerve (C5 and C6) arises from posterior cord of 
brachial plexus. It provides motor innervation to the deltoid 
and teres minor muscles and sensory innervation to the 
shoulder joint and to the skin over the lower lateral part of 
the shoulder. The branches of axillary nerve are shown in 
Figure 13.1 (for details see Chapter 5, page 70).
MUSCULOCUTANEOUS NERVE (Fig. 13.2)
The musculocutaneous nerve arises from lateral cord of the 
brachial plexus (C5, C6, and C7). It provides motor 
innervation to the muscles on the front of the arm and 
Fig. 13.1 Course and distribution of the axillary nerve.
Shoulder joint
AXILLARY NERVE
Anterior branch
Teres minor
Pseudoganglion
Upper lateral
cutaneous branch of
arm to skin of lower
lateral part of deltoid
Posterior branch
AXILLA
Skin to lower
half of deltoid
Inferior
Superior
Lateral
Medial
Deltoid
Brachialis
Biceps
brachii
Elbow joint
Tendon of biceps brachii
Deep fascia
Lateral cutaneous nerve of
forearm to lateral part of
forearm skin
Coracobrachialis 
MUSCULOCUTANEUS NERVE
AXILLA
Lateral
Medial
Inferior
Superior
Brachialis
Fig. 13.2 Course and distribution of the musculocutaneous 
nerve.
--- Page 188 ---
Major Nerves of the Upper Limb
sensory innervation to the skin of the lateral part of the 
forearm (for details see Chapter 8, page 96).
RADIAL NERVE (Fig. 13.3)
The radial nerve is a continuation of posterior cord of 
brachial plexus in the axilla. It is the largest nerve of the 
brachial plexus. It carries fibres from all the roots (C5, C6, 
C7, C8, and T1) of brachial plexus (but T1 fibres are not 
constant).
In the axilla, the radial nerve lies posterior to the third 
part of the axillary artery and anterior to the muscles 
forming the posterior wall of the axilla.
In the axilla, it gives off the following three branches:
1. Posterior cutaneous nerve of arm (which provides sensory 
innervation to skin on the back of the arm up to the 
elbow).
2. Nerve to the long head of triceps.
3. Nerve to the medial head of triceps.
Long head of triceps
RADIAL NERVE
Profunda brachii artery
Posterior cutaneous
nerve of arm
Medial head of triceps
Lateral intermuscular septum
Brachialis (small lateral part)
Brachioradialis
Radial artery
Abductor pollicis longus
Extensor pollicis brevis
Extensor pollicis longus
Brachioradialis
Extensor carpi radialis longus
Deep terminal branch of radial nerve
(posterior interosseous nerve)
Superficial terminal branch of radial nerve
(superficial radial nerve)
Skin of lateral side of dorsum of hand and
lateral 3½ digits except nail beds
AXILLA
FOREARM
HAND
Lateral head of triceps
Anconeus
Lower lateral cutaneous
nerve of arm
Posterior cutaneous
nerve of forearm
Supinator
Extensor digitorum
Extensor digiti minimi
Extensor carpi ulnaris
Abductor pollicis longus
Extensor pollicis brevis
Extensor pollicis longus
Extensor indicis
Inferior radio-ulnar joint
Wrist joint
Extensor carpi
radialis brevis
Inferior
Medial
Lateral
Superior
TENDONS OF
Elbow joint
Fig. 13.3 Course and distribution of the radial nerve.
--- Page 189 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
Radial nerve enters the arm at the lower border of the 
teres major. It passes between the long and medial heads of 
triceps to enter the lower triangular space, through which it 
reaches the spiral groove along with profunda brachii artery. 
The radial nerve in the spiral groove lies in direct contact 
with the humerus.
N.B. Boundaries of the Spiral Groove
Anteriorly: Middle one-third of the shaft of humerus.
Above: 
Origin of the lateral head of triceps.
Below: 
Origin of the medial head of triceps.
Posteriorly: Fibres of lateral and long head triceps.
In the spiral groove, it gives off the following five branches:
1. Lower lateral cutaneous nerve of the arm, which provides 
sensory innervation to the skin on the lateral surface of 
the arm up to the elbow.
2. Posterior cutaneous nerve of the forearm, which provides 
sensory innervation to the skin down the middle of the 
back of the forearm up to the wrist.
3. Nerve to lateral head of triceps.
4. Nerve to medial head of triceps.
5. Nerve to anconeus (it runs through the substance of 
medial head of triceps to reach the anconeus).
At the lower end of the spiral groove, the radial nerve 
pierces the lateral muscular septum of the arm and enters the 
anterior compartment of the arm. Here, it first descends 
between the brachialis and brachioradialis, and then between 
brachialis and extensor carpi radialis longus before entering 
the cubital fossa.
In the anterior compartment of arm above the lateral 
epicondyle, it gives off the following three branches:
1. Nerve to brachialis (small lateral part).
2. Nerve to brachioradialis.
3. Nerve to extensor carpi radialis longus (ECRL).
At the level of lateral epicondyle of humerus, it terminates 
by dividing into superficial and deep branches in the lateral 
part of the cubital fossa.
The deep branch (also called posterior interosseous 
nerve), in the cubital fossa supplies two muscles, viz.
1. Extensor carpi radialis brevis.
2. Supinator.
After supplying these two muscles, it passes through the 
substance of supinator and enters the posterior compart-
ment of the forearm and supplies all the extensor muscles of 
the forearm. It also gives articular branches to the distal 
radio-ulnar, wrist, and carpal joints.
The superficial branch (also called superficial radial 
nerve) is sensory. It runs downwards over the supinator, 
pronator teres, and flexor digitorum superficialis deep to 
brachioradialis. About one-third of the way down the 
forearm (at about 7 cm above wrist), it passes posteriorly, 
emerging from under the tendon of brachioradialis, proximal 
to the styloid process of radius and then passes over the 
tendons of anatomical snuff-box, where it terminates as 
cutaneous branches which provide sensory innervation to 
skin over the lateral part of the dorsum of hand and dorsal 
surfaces of lateral 3½ digits proximal to the nail beds.
Injuries of the radial nerve: The radial nerve may be 
injured at three sites: (a) in the axilla, (b) in the spiral groove, 
and (c) at the elbow.
A. Injury of radial nerve in the axilla
In the axilla the radial nerve may be injured by the pressure 
of the upper end of crutch (crutch palsy)
Characteristic clinical features in such cases will be as 
follows:
Motor loss
• Loss of extension of elbow—due to paralysis of triceps.
• Loss of extension of wrist—due to paralysis of wrist 
extensors. This causes wrist drop due to unopposed 
action of flexor muscles of the forearm (Fig. 13.4).
• Loss of extension of digits—due to paralysis of extensor 
digitorum, extensor indicis, extensor digiti minimi, and 
extensor pollicis longus.
• Loss of supination in extended elbow because supinator 
and brachioradialis are paralyzed but supination becomes 
possible in flexed elbow by the action of biceps brachii.
Sensory loss
• Sensory loss on small area of skin over the posterior 
surface of the lower part of the arm.
• Sensory loss along narrow strip on the back of forearm.
• Sensory loss on the lateral part of dorsum of hand at the 
base of thumb and dorsal surface of lateral 3½ digits. 
More often, there is an isolated sensory loss on the 
dorsum of hand at the base of the thumb (Fig. 13.5).
B. Injury of radial nerve in the radial/spiral groove 
In radial groove, the radial nerve may be injured due to:
(a) midshaft fracture of humerus,
(b) inadvertently wrongly placed intramuscular injection, 
(c) direct pressure on radial nerve by a drunkard falling 
asleep with his one arm over the back of the chair 
(Saturday night paralysis; Fig. 13.6).
Injury to radial nerve occurs most commonly in the distal 
part of the groove beyond the origin of nerve to triceps and 
cutaneous nerves.
Clinical features in such cases will be as follows:
Motor loss
• Loss of extension of the wrist and fingers.
• Wrist drop.
• Loss of supination when the arm is extended.
Clinical correlation
--- Page 190 ---
Major Nerves of the Upper Limb
• Sensory loss is restricted only to a variable small area 
over the dorsum of hand between the first and second 
metacarpals.
N.B. Extension of the elbow is possible but may be 
little weak because nerves to long and lateral heads of 
triceps arises in the axilla i.e., before the site of lesion.
C. Injury of radial nerve at elbow
Radial tunnel syndrome: It is an entrapment neuropathy of 
the deep branch of radial nerve at elbow. The compression 
of radial nerve at elbow may be caused by the following four 
structures:
(a) Fibrous bands, which can tether the radial nerve to the 
radio-humeral joint.
(b) Sharp tendinous margin of extensor carpi radialis 
brevis.
(c) Leash of vessels from the radial recurrent artery.
(d) Arcade of Frohse, a fibro-aponeurotic proximal edge of 
the superficial part of the supinator muscle.
Characteristic clinical features:
• Loss of extension of the wrist and fingers but no wrist 
drop.
• Pain over the extensor aspect of the forearm.
MEDIAN NERVE (Fig. 13.7)
The median nerve arises from brachial plexus in axilla by 
two roots: (a) lateral and (b) medial. The lateral root (C5, C6, 
and C7) arises from lateral cord of brachial plexus and 
medial root (C8 and T1) arises from medial cord of the 
brachial plexus. The medial root crosses in front of the third 
part of axillary artery to unite with lateral root in a Y-shaped 
manner either in front of or on the lateral side of the artery 
to form the median nerve. So the root value of median nerve 
is C5, C6, C7, C8, and T1.
In the axilla, the median nerve lies on the lateral side of 
the third part of the axillary artery. It enters the arm at the 
lower border of teres major.
In the arm, initially, median nerve lies lateral to brachial 
artery and then crosses in front of the artery from lateral to 
medial side at the level of midhumerus (i.e., level of insertion 
of coracobrachialis). After crossing, it runs downwards to 
enter cubital fossa.
In the cubital fossa, the median nerve lies medial to the 
brachial artery and tendon of biceps brachii. Here it is 
covered by bicipital aponeurosis, which separates it from the 
median cubital vein.
In the cubital fossa, it gives muscular branches from its 
medial side to supply all the superficial flexors of the forearm 
flexor carpi radialis, palmaris longus, and flexor digitorum 
superficialis) except flexor carpi ulnaris.
Median nerve leaves the cubital fossa by passing between 
the two heads of pronator teres. At this point, it gives off 
anterior interosseous nerve.
The anterior interosseous nerve is purely motor and 
supplies 2½ muscles:
1. Flexor pollicis longus.
2. Lateral half of the flexor digitorum profundus (FDP).
3. Pronator quadratus.
Fig. 13.6 Saturday night paralysis. Note drunk lady falling 
asleep with arm over the back of chair.
Fig. 13.4 Wrist drop resulting from radial nerve injury.
Isolated
sensory loss
Fig. 13.5 Area of sensory loss in hand following radial nerve 
injury above the elbow.
--- Page 191 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
Fig. 13.7 Course and distribution of the median nerve (RB = recurrent branch).
Brachial artery
MEDIAN NERVE
Pronator teres
Flexor carpi radialis
Palmaris longus
Flexor digitorum superficialis
Flexor digitorum superficialis
Flexor retinaculum
1st lumbrical
Palmar digital branches
(lateral 3½ digits including
nail beds) 
2nd lumbrical
Abductor pollicis brevis
Flexor pollicis longus
Pronator quadratus
Flexor carpi radialis
Palmar cutaneous branch
(lateral ½ of palmar skin)
Wrist and inferior
radio-ulnar joint
Flexor digitorum
profundus (lateral half)
Flexor pollicis brevis
Biceps tendon
Anterior interosseous nerve
AXILLA
FOREARM
HAND
Opponens pollicis
Lateral
Medial
Inferior
Superior
--- Page 192 ---
Major Nerves of the Upper Limb
In the forearm, the median nerve passes downwards behind 
the tendinous arch/bridge between the two heads of flexor 
digitorum superficialis and runs deep to the flexor digitorum 
superficialis. About 5 cm proximal to the flexor retinaculum, 
the median nerve emerges from the lateral side of the FDS and 
becomes superficial, lying lateral to the tendons of FDS and 
posterior to the tendon of palmaris longus.
In the midarm, the median nerve gives muscular branch 
to the radial head of flexor digitorum superficialis, which 
gives rise to tendon for index finger.
Before entering the carpal tunnel, it gives off its palmar 
cutaneous branch, which passes superficial to the flexor 
retinaculum to supply the skin over the thenar eminence and 
lateral part of the palm.
Median nerve enters the palm by passing through carpal 
tunnel where it lies deep to flexor retinaculum and superficial 
to the tendons of FDS, FDP, and FPL and their associated 
ulnar and radial bursae.
In the palm, the median nerve flattens at the distal border 
of the flexor retinaculum and divides into lateral and medial 
divisions. The lateral division gives a recurrent branch, 
which curls upwards to supply thenar muscles except the 
deep head of flexor pollicis brevis. It then divides into three 
palmar digital branches. The medial divisions give off two 
palmar digital nerves.
The five palmar digital nerves supply:
(a) sensory innervation to the skin of the palmar aspect of 
the lateral 3½ digits including nail beds and skin on the 
dorsal aspect of distal phalanges, and
(b) first and second lumbricals.
N.B.
• Median nerve is also termed laborer’s nerve because the 
coarse movements of the hand required by laborers (e.g., 
digging the ground, lifting weight, etc.) are performed by 
long flexors of the forearm which are mostly supplied by 
the median nerve.
• It is also termed ‘eye of the hand’ or ‘peripheral eye’ 
because it provides sensory innervation to the pulp of the 
thumb and index finger which are used to see the 
thinness and texture of cloth and are also used for 
performing fine movements, e.g., buttoning a coat.
Injuries of the median nerve: The lesions of median nerve 
may occur at the following four sites: (a) at elbow, (b) at 
mid-forearm, (c) at wrist (distal forearm), and (d) in the 
carpal tunnel.
A. Injury of the median nerve at the elbow: At elbow the 
median nerve can be injured due to:
(a) supracondylar fracture of humerus,
(b) application of tight tourniquet during venipuncture, and
Clinical correlation
(c) entrapment of nerve between two heads of pronator 
teres or under the fibrous arch connecting the two 
heads of flexor digitorum superficialis.
Characteristic clinical features in such cases will be as 
follows:
• Forearm kept in supine position (loss of pronation), due to 
paralysis of pronator teres.
• Wrist flexion is weak—due to paralysis of all the flexors of 
forearm except medial half of FDP and flexor carpi ulnaris.
• Adduction of wrist—due to paralysis of FCR and 
unopposed action of FCU and medial half of FDP.
• No flexion is possible at the interphalangeal (IP) joints of 
index and middle fingers.
• Benediction deformity of the hand (Fig. 13.8A), i.e., when 
patient tries to make fist, the index and middle fingers remain 
straight, due to paralysis of both superficial and deep flexors 
of these fingers leading to loss of flexion at PIP and DIP 
joints. The ring and the little finger can be kept in flexed 
position due to intact nerve supply of medial half of the FDP.
• Loss of flexion of terminal phalanx of thumb, due to 
paralysis of FPL.
• Ape-thumb deformity (Fig. 13.8B), in which thenar 
eminence is flattened and thumb is laterally rotated and 
adducted, due to paralysis of muscles of thenar eminence 
and normal adductor pollicis, respectively.
• Loss of sensation in lateral half of the palm and lateral 3½ 
digits and also on the dorsal aspects of same digits 
(Fig. 13.9).
B. Injury of the median nerve at the mid-forearm: The injury 
of median nerve at mid-forearm results in pointing index fi nger 
due to paralysis of radial head of FDS muscle that continues as 
tendon of index finger; other signs and symptoms will be same 
as those which occur in lesion at distal forearm and wrist.
C. Injury of the median nerve at wrist (distal forearm): At 
wrist, median nerve and its palmar cutaneous branch may 
be injured just proximal to the flexor retinaculum by deep 
lacerated wounds (cut injury), e.g., suicidal cuts.
Characteristic clinical features in such a case will be as follows:
• Ape-thumb deformity, due to paralysis of muscles of 
thenar eminence.
• Loss of sensation on the lateral part of the palm (including 
that over the thenar eminence) and lateral 3½ digits 
including loss of sensation on the dorsal aspect of these 
digits (Fig. 13.9).
D. Injury in the carpal tunnel: The median nerve is injured in 
the carpal tunnel due to its compression and produces a 
clinical condition called carpal tunnel syndrome. The carpal 
tunnel is formed by anterior concavity of carpus and flexor 
retinaculum. The tunnel is tightly packed with nine long flexor 
tendons of fingers and thumb with their surrounding synovial 
sheaths and median nerve. The median nerve gets 
compressed in the tunnel due to its narrowing following a 
number of pathological conditions such as
(a) tenosynovitis of flexor tendons (idiopathic),
(b) myxedema (deficiency of thyroxine),
(c) retention of fluid in pregnancy,
(d) fracture dislocation of lunate bone, and
(e) osteoarthritis of the wrist.
--- Page 193 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
Characteristic clinical features of the carpal tunnel 
syndrome are as follows:
• Feeling of burning pain or ‘pins and needles’ along the 
sensory distribution of median nerve (i.e., lateral 3½ 
digits) especially at night.
• There is no sensory loss over the thenar eminence 
because skin over thenar eminence is supplied by the 
palmar cutaneous branch of the median nerve, which 
passes superficial to flexor retinaculum.
• Weakness of thenar muscles.
• ‘Ape-thumb deformity’ may occur, if left untreated, due to 
paralysis of the thenar muscles.
• Positive Tinel’s sign (Fig 13.10) and Phalen’s test 
(Fig. 13.11).
• Reduced conduction velocity in the median nerve (<30 
m/s) is diagnosis.
N.B. The signs and symptoms of the carpal tunnel 
syndrome are dramatically relieved by decompressing 
the tunnel by giving a longitudinal incision through flexor 
retinaculum.
ULNAR NERVE (Fig. 13.12)
The ulnar nerve arises in the axilla from the medial cord of 
brachial plexus (C8 and T1). It receives a contribution from 
the ventral ramus of C7. The C7 fibres in the ulnar nerve 
supply flexor carpi ulnaris.
In the axilla, the nerve lies medial to third part of axillary 
artery (between axillary artery and vein).
It enters the arm as part of main neurovascular bundle 
and runs distally along the medial side of the brachial 
Fig. 13.8 Effects of the median nerve injury: A, benediction 
deformity of the hand (benediction attitude of hand); 
B, ape-thumb deformity.
Thumb
rotated
laterally
Benediction
attitude
Fig. 13.9 Area of sensory loss in hand following injury of 
the median nerve.
Flexor retinaculum
Fig. 13.10 Tinel’s sign. Percussion over flexor retinaculum 
reproduces patient’s symptoms.
Fig. 13.11 Phalen’s test. Flexion of both wrists against each 
other for one minute reproduces patient’s symptoms.
Median nerve
--- Page 194 ---
Major Nerves of the Upper Limb
Fig. 13.12 Course and distribution of the ulnar nerve.
Medial intermuscular septum of arm
Flexor carpi ulnaris
Flexor carpi ulnaris
Wrist joint
Flexor digiti minimi
Abductor digiti minimi
Opponens digiti minimi
3 palmar interossei
4 dorsal interossei
2 medial lumbricals
Adductor pollicis
Elbow joint
Brachial artery
ULNAR NERVE
Inferior
Superior
Lateral
Medial
Medial epicondyle of humerus
Superficial
terminal branch
Palmaris brevis
Palmar aspect of
medial 1½ digits
Palmar cutaneous branch
(medial ½ of palmar skin)
Flexor pollicis
brevis (often)
Deep terminal branch
Dorsal cutaneous branch
(skin of medial side of dorsum
of hand and medial 1½ fingers)
Flexor digitorum profundus (medial half)
AXILLA
FOREARM
HAND
Ulnar artery
--- Page 195 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
artery up to the midarm (level of insertion of 
coracobrachialis) where it pierces the medial intermuscular 
septum to enter the posterior compartment of the arm and 
runs downwards to the back of the medial epicondyle of 
humerus. On the back of medial epicondyle, it is lodged in 
a groove where it can be easily palpated. The groove is 
converted into a tunnel called cubital tunnel by a fibrous 
band extending between medial epicondyle and olecranon 
process. The ulnar nerve crosses the ulnar collateral 
ligament in the floor of the tunnel.
The ulnar nerve does not give any branch in the axilla and 
in the arm.
The nerve enters the forearm by passing between the two 
heads of flexor carpi ulnaris. In the upper third of forearm, it 
runs almost vertically downwards under flexor carpi ulnaris. 
In the lower two-third of the forearm, it becomes superficial 
and lies lateral to the flexor carpi ulnaris. In this part of its 
course the ulnar nerve and artery descend together, artery 
being on the lateral side of the nerve.
In the forearm, it gives off the following branches:
1. In the proximal forearm, it gives muscular branches to:
(a) flexor carpi ulnaris, and
(b) medial half of flexor digitorum profundus.
2. In the mid-forearm, it gives off palmar cutaneous branch, 
which enters the palm superficial to the flexor 
retinaculum to provide sensory innervation to the skin 
over the hypothenar eminence.
3. In the distal forearm, about 5 cm proximal to the wrist, 
it gives off dorsal cutaneous branch which provides 
sensory innervation to the skin over the medial third of 
the dorsum of the hand and medial 1½ finger.
The ulnar nerve enters the palm by passing superficial to 
the flexor retinaculum lying just lateral to the pisiform. Here 
the ulnar nerve is covered by a fascial band (volar carpal 
ligament). The space under this fascial band is termed ulnar 
tunnel. Just distal to pisiform, the ulnar nerve divides into its 
terminal superficial and deep branches. The superficial 
terminal branch supplies palmaris brevis provides sensory 
innervation to the skin on the palmar surface of medial 1½ 
fingers.
The deep terminal branch enters Guyon’s canal (pisohamate 
tunnel) under cover of pisohamate ligament and turns 
laterally within concavity of deep palmar arterial arch and 
ends within substance of adductor pollicis which it supplies. 
The deep branch of ulnar nerve is purely motor and supplies all 
the intrinsic muscles of the hand except the muscles of thenar 
eminence and first two lumbricals.
N.B. The ulnar nerve is often referred to as ‘nerve of fine 
movements’/‘musician’s nerve’ because it innervates most 
of the intrinsic muscles of the hand that are involved in the 
fine intricate hand movements as required by the musicians 
while playing musical instruments.
The ulnar nerve behind medial epicondyle of humerus is 
termed ‘funny bone’ because when the medial part of the 
elbow hits a hard surface, tingling sensations occur along 
the ulnar side of the forearm and hand.
Injuries of the ulnar nerve: The ulnar nerve is commonly 
injured at two sites: (a) at elbow and (b) at wrist.
A. Injury of the ulnar nerve at elbow: The injury of ulnar 
nerve at elbow may occur due to:
(a) fracture dislocation of the medial epicondyle,
(b) thickening of the fibrous roof of the cubital tunnel 
(cubital tunnel syndrome), and
(c) compression between the two heads of flexor carpi 
ulnaris (FCU) muscle, and
(d) valgus deformity of elbow (tardy or late ulnar nerve 
palsy).
Characteristic clinical features in such cases will be as 
follows (Fig. 13.13):
• Atrophy and flattening of hypothenar eminence.
• Claw-hand deformity (main en griffe) affecting ring and 
little fingers. The first phalanges of these fingers are 
extended and middle and distal phalanges are flexed 
(Fig. 13.3A).
• It is not a true claw hand.
• Loss of abduction and adduction of fingers.
• Flattening of hypothenar eminence and depression of 
interosseous spaces on dorsum of hand due to atrophy of 
interosseous muscles, respectively (Fig. 13.3B).
• Loss of adduction of thumb.
• Loss of sensation over the palmar and dorsal surfaces of 
the medial third of the hand and medial 1½ fingers 
(Fig. 13.14).
• Foment’s sign is positive (Fig. 13.15).*
B. Injury of the ulnar nerve at wrist: The ulnar nerve at 
wrist is injured due to
(a) superficial position of ulnar nerve at this site makes its 
vulnerable to cuts and wounds, and
(b) compression in the Guyon’s canal/pisohamate tunnel.
Characteristic clinical features in such cases will be as 
follows:
• Claw-hand deformity affecting ring and little fingers (ulnar 
claw hand) but it is more pronounced (ulnar paradox) 
because the FDP is not paralyzed; therefore there is a 
marked flexion of DIP joints.
• Atrophy and flattening of hypothenar eminence.
• Loss of abduction and adduction of fingers.
• Foment’s sign is positive.
Clinical correlation
--- Page 196 ---
Major Nerves of the Upper Limb
N.B. Complete claw hand (Fig. 13.16): The combined 
lesions of the median and ulnar nerves at elbow 
cause a true/complete claw-hand deformity. The 
characteristic clinical features of a true claw hand are 
as follows:
• Hyperextension of the wrist and metacarpophalangeal 
(MP) joints.
• Flexion of interphalangeal (IP) joints.
*Foment’s sign: The patient is asked to grasp the card 
between the thumb and index finger on the affected side 
and when the examining doctors pulls it, the flexion of distal 
phalanx of thumb occurs due to paralysis of adductor pollicis 
(i.e., Foment’s sign is positive).
The features of the three principal nerves (radial, 
median, and ulnar) of upper limb are summarized in 
Table 13.1.
AUTONOMOUS SENSORY AREAS OF THE HAND
An autonomous sensory area is that part of the dermatome 
that has no overlap from the adjacent nerves.
The autonomous sensory areas of the hand are used to 
test the integrity of nerves supplying the hand (e.g., ulnar, 
median, and radial). The autonomous sensory areas of the 
radial, median, and ulnar nerves are shown in Figure 
13.17.
Fig. 13.13 Effects of the ulnar nerve injury: A, ulnar claw 
hand; B, hollowing of skin in the first web space on dorsal 
aspect of hand.
Fig. 13.14 Sensory loss in the hand following ulnar nerve 
injury: A, Palmar aspect; B, dorsal aspect.
Fig. 13.15 Foment’s sign to test the integrity of palmar interossei. The wrist should be dorsiflexed to rule out the action of 
long flexors of fingers.
--- Page 197 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
Fig. 13.17 Autonomous sensory areas of the radial, median, 
and ulnar nerves.
Fig. 13.16 Complete claw hand following combined lesions 
of the median and ulnar nerves.
Table 13.1 Characteristics of radial, median, and ulnar nerves of the upper limb
Nerve
Radial nerve
Median nerve 
(syn. Laborer’s nerve)
Ulnar nerve 
(syn. Musician’s nerve)
Origin
Posterior cord of brachial 
plexus
Medial and lateral cords of brachial 
plexus
Medial cord of brachial plexus
Root value
C5–T1
C5–T1
C8–T1
Motor innervation
Supplies all the muscles on 
the back of arm and forearm
Supplies
– all the muscles on the front of 
forearm except flexor carpi ulnaris 
and medial half of flexor digitorum 
profundus
– muscle of thenar eminence and first 
two lumbricals
Supplies
– One-and-half muscles of the forearm 
(flexor carpi ulnaris and medial half of 
the flexor digitorum profundus)
– all the intrinsic muscles of the hand, 
except first two lumbricals and 
muscles of thenar eminence
Sensory innervation
• Posterior surface of the 
arm and forearm
• Dorsal aspect of lateral 
2/3rd of hand and lateral 
3½ digits
Palmar aspect of lateral 2/3rd of hand, 
and lateral 3½ digits including their 
dorsal tips
Palmar aspect of medial 1/3rd of hand 
and medial 1½ fingers
Effects of lesion
• Wrist drop
• Absence of extension of 
MP joints of digits
• Loss of sensation to a 
variable small area over 
the root of the thumb
• Ape-thumb deformity (Simian’s 
hand)
• Wasting of thenar eminence
• Absence of abduction of thumb
• Pointing index finger
• Absence of opposition of thumb
• Loss of sensation on the palmar 
aspect of lateral part of hand and 
lateral 3½ digits
• Claw-hand deformity (main en griffe)
• Wasting of hypothenar eminence
• Absence of abduction and adduction 
of fingers
• Loss of sensation on the ulnar side of 
the hand and medial 1½ digits
Median nerve
Radial nerve
Ulnar nerve
--- Page 198 ---
Major Nerves of the Upper Limb
SEGMENTAL INNERVATION OF THE
MUSCLES OF THE UPPER LIMB
The knowledge of these segmental values is of importance 
in the diagnosis of injuries to the nerves or to the 
Table 13.2 Segmental innervation of the muscles of the upper limb
Segment
Muscles innervated
• Deltoid
• Supraspinatus, infraspinatus, and teres minor
• Rhomboideus major and minor
• Coracobrachialis, biceps brachii, and brachialis
• Brachioradialis and supinator
(Abductors and lateral rotators of the shoulder; flexors and supinators of the forearm)
• Pectoralis major and minor
• Subscapularis, latissimus dorsi, and teres major
• Serratus anterior
• Triceps
• Pronator teres and pronator quadratus
(Adductors and medial rotators of the shoulder; extensors and pronators of the forearm)
Extensors and flexors of the wrist
Long flexors and extensors of the fingers
Small muscles of the hand
spinal cord from which they arise. The segmental 
innervation of the muscles of the upper limb is given in 
Table 13.2. These are based on the clinical data observed 
by Kocher.
--- Page 200 ---
Introduction to Thorax 
and Thoracic Cage
CHAPTER
The thorax is the upper part of trunk, which extends from 
root of the neck to the abdomen. In general usage, the term 
chest is used as a synonym for thorax. The cavity of trunk is 
divided by the diaphragm into an upper part called thoracic 
cavity and the lower part called the abdominal cavity. The 
thoracic cavity contains the principal organs of respiration–
the lungs, which are separated from each other by bulky and 
movable median septum – the mediastinum. The principal 
structures in the mediastinum are heart and great vessels.
THORACIC CAGE
The thorax is supported by a skeletal framework called 
thoracic cage. It provides attachment to muscles of thorax, 
upper 
extremities, 
back, 
diaphragm. 
osteocartilaginous and elastic in nature. It is primarily 
designed for increasing or decreasing the intrathoracic 
pressure so that air is sucked into lungs during inspiration 
and expelled from lungs during expiration—an essential 
mechanism of respiration.
FORMATION OF THORACIC CAGE (Fig. 14.1)
The thoracic cage is formed:
Anteriorly: 
by sternum (breast bone).
Posteriorly: 
 by 12 thoracic vertebrae and intervening 
intervertebral discs.
Laterally: 
by 12 pairs of ribs and associated 12 pairs of 
each side: 
costal cartilages.
The rib cage is formed by sternum, costal cartilages, and 
ribs attached to the thoracic vertebrae.
The ribs articulate as follows:
1. Posteriorly—all the ribs articulate with the thoracic 
vertebrae.
2. Anteriorly—(a) the 
upper 
seven 
ribs 
(1st–7th) 
articulate with the side of sternum 
through their costal cartilages.
(b) The next three ribs (e.g., 8th, 9th, and 
10th) articulate with each other 
through their costal cartilages.
(c) The lower two ribs (e.g., 11th and 
12th) do not articulate and anterior 
ends of their costal cartilages are free.
N.B. The costal cartilages of 7th, 8th, 9th, and 10th ribs 
form a sloping costal margin.
SHAPE OF THORACIC CAGE (Fig. 14.2)
The thoracic cage resembles a truncated cone with its narrow 
end above and broad end below. The narrow upper end is 
continuous above with root of neck from which it is partly 
Manubrium
1st rib
Costal
cartilages
Body
Xiphoid
process
12th rib
Fig. 14.1 Anterior aspect of thoracic cage.
--- Page 201 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
separated on either side by the suprapleural membranes. The 
broad lower end is completely separated from abdominal 
cavity by the diaphragm, but provides passage to structures 
like, aorta, esophagus, and inferior vena cava.
The diaphragm is dome shaped with its convexity directed 
upwards. Thus, the upper abdominal viscera lies within the 
thoracic cage and are protected by it.
In life, the upper end of thorax appears broad due to the 
presence of shoulder girdle made up of clavicles and scapulae 
and associated scapular musculature.
N.B. The thoracic cavity is actually much smaller than one 
assumes because the upper narrow part of thoracic cage 
appears broad (vide supra) and lower broad part of thoracic 
cage is encroached by the abdominal viscera due to dome-
shaped diaphragm.
TRANSVERSE SECTION OF THORAX
In transverse section, the adult thorax is kidney shaped with 
transverse diameter more than the anteroposterior diameter 
(Fig. 14.3B, C). This is because the ribs are placed obliquely 
in adults.
In transverse section, the thorax of infants below the age 
of two years is circular with equal transverse and 
anteroposterior diameter (Fig. 14.3A). This is because the 
ribs are horizontally placed.
The transverse sections of thorax in adult and infant are 
compared in Table 14.1.
Neck
Thoracic
cavity
Abdominal
cavity
Diaphragm
Sibson’s fascia
Shoulder
Fig. 14.2 Thoracic cage and thoracic cavity: A, shape of thoracic cage; B, schematic diagram to show how the size of thoracic 
cavity is reduced by upward projection of the diaphragm and by inward projection of the shoulder.
Fig. 14.3 The shape of thoracic cavity as seen in transverse 
section of thorax: A, in infant; B, in adult; C, transverse 
section of adult thorax in CT scan.
--- Page 202 ---
Introduction to Thorax and Thoracic Cage
SUPERIOR THORACIC APERTURE
(THORACIC INLET)
The thoracic cavity communicates with the root of the neck 
through a narrow opening called superior thoracic aperture 
or thoracic inlet.
N.B. The superior thoracic aperture is called thoracic outlet 
by the clinicians because important arteries and T1 spinal 
nerves emerge from thorax through this aperture and enter 
the neck and upper limbs.
Anatomists refer to the superior thoracic aperture as 
thoracic inlet because air and food enter the thorax through 
trachea and esophagus, respectively.
Boundaries (Fig. 14.4)
Anteriorly:
Superior border of manubrium sterni.
Posteriorly:
Anterior border of the superior surface of the 
body of T1 vertebra.
Laterally 
(on each 
side):
Medial border of first rib and its cartilage.
The upper end of anterior boundary lies 1.5 inches below 
the upper end of posterior boundary because first rib slopes 
downwards and forwards from its posterior end to anterior 
Table 14.1 Comparison of thoracic cavity as seen in 
transverse sections of the thorax in adult and infant
Thoracic cavity in adult
Thoracic cavity in infant
Kidney shaped
Circular
Ribs obliquely placed
Ribs horizontally placed
Transverse diameter can be 
increased by thoracic 
breathing (Hence respiration 
is thoraco-abdominal)
Transverse diameter cannot be 
increased by thoracic 
breathing (Hence respiration 
is purely abdominal)
The thorax up to 2 years after birth is circular in cross 
section. Therefore, the diameter of thorax cannot be 
increased within the circumference, the length of which 
remains constant. Therefore, in children up to the 2 years of 
age, the respiration is almost entirely abdominal.
Consequently, young children are prone to suffer from 
pneumonia after abdominal operations, because they 
resist breathing (being abdominal) due to pain. As a result 
the secretions in the lungs tend to accumulate, which may 
become infected and cause pneumonia.
Clinical correlation
Fig. 14.4 Boundaries of the thoracic inlet.
Anterior border of
superior surface of
T1 vertebra
Medial border 
of first rib 
Medial border
of first costal
cartilage 
Upper border of 
manubrium sterni 
Thoracic inlet
Fig. 14.5 Superior thoracic aperture; arrow (lateral view).
First rib
Manubrium
Xiphoid
process
Diaphragm
end (Fig. 14.5). Therefore, plane of thoracic inlet slopes 
(directed) downwards and forwards with an obliquity of 
about 45°. The upper border of manubrium sterni lies at the 
level of upper border of T3 vertebra (Fig. 14.6).
N.B. Due to downward and forward inclination of thoracic 
inlet, the apex of lung with the overlying pleura projects into 
the root of the lung.
Shape and Dimensions
Shape: Reniform/kidney shaped.
Dimensions: Transverse diameter: 4.5 inches. 
Anteroposterior diameter: 2.5 inches.
--- Page 203 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
DIAPHRAGM OF SUPERIOR THORACIC APERTURE 
(SUPRAPLEURAL MEMBRANE/SIBSON’S FASCIA)
The part of thoracic inlet, on either side, is closed by a 
dense fascial sheet called suprapleural membrane or 
Sibson’s fascia, or diaphragm of superior thoracic 
aperture. It is tent-shaped.
Attachments and Relations (Fig. 14.7)
The apex of Sibson’s fascia is attached to the tip of transverse 
process of C7 vertebra, and its base is attached to the inner 
border of first rib and its costal cartilage. Its superior 
surface is related to the subclavian vessels and its inferior 
surface is related to cervical pleura, covering the apex of the 
lung.
Functions
The functions of Sibson’s fascia are as follows:
1. It protects the underlying cervical pleura, beneath which 
lies the apex of the lung.
2. It resists the intrathoracic pressure during respiration. 
As a result, the root of neck is not puffed up and down 
during respiration.
N.B. Morphologically, Sibson’s fascia represents the spread 
out degenerated tendon of scalenus minimus (or pleuralis) 
muscle.
Structures Passing Through Thoracic Inlet (Fig. 14.8)
 
 Muscles
1. Sternohyoid.
2. Sternothyroid.
3. Longus cervicis/longus colli.
 
 Arteries
1. Right and left internal thoracic arteries.
2. Brachiocephalic trunk/artery.
3. Left common carotid artery.
4. Left subclavian artery.
5. Right and left superior intercostal arteries.
 
 Nerves
1. Right and left vagus nerves.
2. Left recurrent laryngeal nerve.
3. Right and left phrenic nerves.
4. Right and left first thoracic nerves.
5. Right and left sympathetic chains.
 
 Veins
1. Right and left brachiocephalic veins.
2. Right and left 1st posterior intercostal veins.
3. Inferior thyroid veins.
Upper end of
posterior boundary 
Intervertebral
discs
Plane of
thoracic inlet
Manubrium
sterni
1.5" 
Upper end
of anterior
boundary
Fig. 14.6 Plane of the thoracic inlet.
Fig. 14.7 Suprapleural membrane/Sibson’s fascia: A, attachments; B, relations.
Transverse process
of C7 vertebra
Sibson’s fascia
(suprapleural
membrane) 
First rib
First costal
cartilage
Sibson’s fascia
(suprapleural membrane) 
Transverse process of 
C7 vertebra
Subclavian artery
Subclavian vein
First rib
Cervical pleura
Apex of lung
--- Page 204 ---
Introduction to Thorax and Thoracic Cage
 Lymphatics
Thoracic duct.
 
 Others
1. Anterior longitudinal ligament.
2. Esophagus.
3. Trachea.
4. Right and left domes of cervical pleura.
5. Apices of right and left lungs.
Thoracic inlet syndrome: The subclavian artery and 
lower trunk of the brachial plexus arch over the first rib, 
hence they may be stretched and pushed up by the 
presence of a congenitally hypertrophied scalenus anterior 
muscle or a cervical rib. This leads to thoracic inlet 
syndrome (also called scalenus anterior syndrome or 
cervical rib syndrome). It presents the following clinical 
features:
• Numbness, tingling, and pain along the medial side of 
forearm and hand, and wasting of small muscles of the 
hand due to the involvement of lower trunk of brachial 
plexus (T1).
• There may be ischemic symptoms in the upper limb 
such as pallor and coldness of the upper limb, and 
weak radial pulse due to compression of the subclavian 
artery.
Clinical correlation
INFERIOR THORACIC APERTURE
(THORACIC OUTLET)
The inferior thoracic aperture is broad and surrounds 
the upper part of the abdominal cavity. The large 
musculoaponeurotic diaphragm attached to the margins of 
thoracic outlet separates the thoracic cavity from the 
abdominal cavity.
Boundaries
Anteriorly:
Xiphisternal joint.
Posteriorly:
Body of 12th thoracic vertebra.
Laterally 
(on each 
side):
Costal margin and 11th and 12th ribs.
DIAPHRAGM OF INFERIOR THORACIC APERTURE 
(Fig. 14.9)
The thoracic outlet is closed by a large dome-shaped flat 
muscle called diaphragm. Since it separates thoracic cavity 
from abdominal cavity, it is also termed thoraco-abdominal 
diaphragm.
The diaphragm is the principal muscle of respiration. It is 
dome shaped and consists of peripheral muscular part, and 
central fibrous part called central tendon.
Fig. 14.8 Structures passing through the thoracic inlet.
First thoracic nerve
Superior intercostal artery
First posterior intercostal vein
Sympathetic chain
Thoracic duct
Left recurrent laryngeal nerve
Left phrenic nerve
Left vagus nerve
Left common carotid artery
Left brachiocephalic vein
Left internal thoracic artery
Sternothyroid
Thymus
Inferior thyroid vein
Brachiocephalic artery
Right internal thoracic artery
Right brachiocephalic vein
Right phrenic nerve
Apex of lung
Trachea
Esophagus
Longus cervicis (colli) 
Left subclavian artery
Sternohyoid
--- Page 205 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
Origin
The origin of the diaphragm is divided into three parts, viz.
1. Sternal.
2. Costal.
3. Vertebral.
Sternal part: It consists of two fleshy slips, which arise from 
the posterior surface of the xiphoid process.
Costal part: On each side, it consists of six fleshy slips, which 
arise from the inner surface of lower six ribs near their costal 
cartilages.
Vertebral part: This part arises by means of (a) right and left 
crura of diaphragm and (b) five arcuate ligaments.
Crura
 
 Right crus: It is a vertical fleshy bundle, which arises from 
the right side of anterior aspects of the upper three lumbar 
vertebrae and intervening intervertebral discs.
 
 Left crus: It is vertical fleshy bundle, which arises from the 
left side of anterior aspects of upper two lumbar vertebrae 
and the intervening intervertebral discs.
The medial margins of the crura are tendinous.
Arcuate ligaments
 
 Median arcuate ligament is an arched fibrous band 
stretching between the upper ends of two crura.
 
 Medial arcuate ligament is the thickened upper margin of 
the psoas sheath. It extends from the side of the body of 
L2 vertebra to the tip of the transverse process of L1 
vertebra.
 
 Lateral arcuate ligament is the thickened upper margin of 
fascia covering the anterior surface of the quadratus 
lumborum. It extends from the tip of transverse process 
of L1 vertebra to the 12th rib.
N.B. The right crus is attached to more number of vertebrae 
because the right side diaphragm has to contract on the 
massive liver.
Fig. 14.9 Origin, insertion, and openings of the diaphragm. Figure in the inset shows details of vertebral origin of the 
diaphragm. 
Left crus of
diaphragm
Median arcuate
ligament 
12th rib
Lateral arcuate
ligament
Medial arcuate
ligament
Right crus of
diaphragm
Inferior vena cava
Central
tendon
Right phrenic
nerve
Intercostal
nerve and
vessels
7th rib
Xiphisternum
Superior
epigastric vessels Musculophrenic
artery
Right vagal trunk
Left vagal trunk
Median arcuate ligament 
Subcostal nerve and vessels
Lateral arcuate ligament
Medial arcuate ligament
Left crus of diaphragm
Sympathetic chain
12th rib
Azygos vein
Thoracic duct
Aorta
Right crus of diaphragm
Esophagus
Esophageal branch of
left gastric artery
--- Page 206 ---
Introduction to Thorax and Thoracic Cage
Insertion
From circumferential origin (vide supra), the muscle fibres 
converge towards the central tendon and insert into its 
margins.
The features of the central tendon are as follows:
1. It is trifoliate in shape, having (a) an anterior (central) 
leaflet, and (b and c) two tongue-shaped posterior 
leaflets. It resembles an equilateral triangle. The right 
posterior leaflet is short and stout, whereas the left 
posterior leaflet is thin and long.
2. It is inseparably fused with the fibrous pericardium.
3. It is located nearer to the sternum than to the vertebral 
column.
Surfaces and Relations
The superior surface of diaphragm projects on either side 
as dome or cupola into the thoracic cavity. Depressed area 
between the two domes is called central tendon. The 
superior surface is covered by endothoracic fascia and is 
related to the bases of right and left pleura on the sides and 
to the fibrous pericardium in the middle.
The inferior surface of diaphragm is lined by the 
diaphragmatic fascia and parietal peritoneum.
 
 On the right side it is related to (a) right lobe of the liver, 
(b) right kidney, and (c) right suprarenal gland.
 
 On the left side it is related to (a) left lobe of the liver, 
(b) fundus of stomach, (c) spleen, (d) left kidney, and 
(e) left suprarenal gland.
Openings of the Diaphragm
The openings of diaphragm are classified into two types: 
(a) major openings and (b) minor openings.
Major Openings
There are three named major openings, viz.
1. Vena caval opening.
2. Esophageal opening.
3. Aortic opening.
The location, shape, and vertebral levels of these openings 
are presented in Table 14.2.
The structure passing through three major opening of 
diaphragm are listed in Table 14.3.
N.B.
• Contraction of diaphragm enlarges the caval opening to 
enhance venous return.
• Contraction of diaphragm has a sphincteric effect on the 
esophageal opening (pinch-cock effect).
Table 14.2 Location, shape, and vertebral level of three 
major openings of the diaphragm
Opening
Location
Shape
Vertebral 
level
Vena caval 
opening
In the central tendon 
slightly to the right of 
median plane 
between the central 
and right posterior 
leaflets
Quadrangular 
or square
T8 (body)
Esophageal 
opening
Slightly to the left of 
median plane (The 
fibres of right crus 
split around the 
opening and act like 
pinch cock)
Oval or 
elliptical
T10 (body)
Aortic 
opening
In the midline behind 
the median arcuate 
ligament
Circular or 
round
T12 (lower 
border of 
the body)
Table 14.3 Structures passing through three major 
openings of the diaphragm
Opening
Structures passing through
Vena caval 
opening
• Inferior vena cava
• Right phrenic nerve
Esophageal 
opening
• Esophagus
• Right and left vagal trunks
• Esophageal branches of left gastric artery
Aortic opening
From right to left these are:
– Azygos vein
– Thoracic duct
– Aorta
• Contraction of diaphragm has no effect on the aortic 
opening because strictly it is outside the diaphragm.
Minor Openings
These are unnamed. Structures passing through these 
openings are as follows:
1. Superior epigastric vessels pass through the gap (space 
of Larry) between the muscular slips arising from 
xiphoid process and 7th costal cartilage.
2. Musculophrenic artery passes through the gap between 
the slips of origin from 7th to 8th ribs.
--- Page 207 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
3. Lower five intercostal nerves and vessels (i.e., 7th–11th) 
pass through gaps between the adjoining costal slips.
4. Subcostal nerves and vessels pass deep to the lateral 
arcuate ligament.
5. Sympathetic chain passes deep to the medial arcuate 
ligament.
6. Greater, lesser, and least splanchnic nerves pass by 
piercing the crus of diaphragm on the corresponding 
side.
7. Hemiazygos vein pierces the left crus of the diaphragm.
Nerve Supply
The diaphragm is supplied by:
(a) right and left phrenic nerves, and
(b) lower five intercostal and subcostal nerves.
The phrenic nerves are both motor and sensory. The right 
phrenic nerve provides motor innervation to the right half of 
the diaphragm up to the right margin of esophageal opening, 
and left phrenic nerve provides motor innervation to the left 
half of the diaphragm up to the left margin of the esophageal 
opening.
The phrenic nerves provide sensory innervation to the 
central tendon of the diaphragm, and pleura and peritoneum 
related to it.
The intercostal nerves supply the peripheral parts of the 
diaphragm.
Arterial Supply
The diaphragm is supplied by the following arteries:
1. Superior phrenic arteries (also called phrenic arteries) 
from thoracic aorta.
2. Inferior phrenic arteries, from the abdominal aorta.
3. Pericardiophrenic arteries, from the internal thoracic 
arteries.
4. Musculophrenic arteries, the terminal branches of the 
internal thoracic arteries.
5. Superior epigastric arteries, the terminal branches of 
the internal thoracic arteries.
6. Lower five intercostal and subcostal arteries from the 
aorta.
Lymphatic Drainage
The lymph from diaphragm is drained into the following 
groups of lymph nodes:
1. Anterior diaphragmatic lymph nodes, situated behind 
the xiphoid process.
2. Posterior diaphragmatic lymph nodes, situated near the 
aortic orifice.
3. Right lateral diaphragmatic nodes, situated near the 
caval opening.
4. Left lateral diaphragmatic nodes, situated near the 
esophageal opening.
Actions of Diaphragm
The diaphragm acts to subserve the following functions:
1. Muscle of inspiration: The diaphragm is the main/
principal muscle of respiration. When it contracts, it 
descends and increases the vertical diameter of the 
thoracic cavity (for details see page 223).
2. Muscle of abdominal staining: The contraction of 
diaphragm along with contraction of muscles of anterior 
abdominal wall raises the intra-abdominal pressure to 
evacuate the pelvic contents (voluntary expulsive efforts, 
e.g., micturition, defecation, vomiting, and parturition).
3. Muscle of weight lifting: By taking deep breath and 
closing the glottis, if possible to raise the intra-
abdominal pressure to such an extent that it will help 
support the vertebral column and prevent its flexion. 
This assists the postvertebral muscles in lifting the 
heavy weights.
4. Thoraco-muscular pump: The descent of diaphragm 
decreases the intrathoracic pressure and at the same 
time increases the intra-abdominal pressure. This 
pressure change compresses the inferior vena cava, and 
consequently its blood is forced upward into the right 
atrium.
5. Sphincter of esophagus: The fibres of the right crus of 
diaphragm subserve a sphincteric control over the 
esophageal opening.
• Diaphragmatic paralysis (paralysis of diaphragm): 
The unilateral damage of phrenic nerve leads to 
unilateral diaphragmatic paralysis. The condition is 
diagnosed during fluoroscopy when an elevated 
hemidiaphragm is seen on the side of lesion, and 
showing paradoxical movements. The bilateral damage 
of phrenic nerves leads to complete diaphragmatic 
paralysis. It is a serious condition as it may cause 
respiratory failure.
• Hiccups: They occur due to involuntary spasmodic 
contractions of the diaphragm accompanied by the 
closure of the glottis. Hiccups normally occur after eating 
or drinking as a result of gastric irritation.
pathological 
causes 
hiccups 
include 
diaphragmatic irritation, phrenic nerve irritation, hysteria, 
and uremia.
Clinical correlation
--- Page 208 ---
Introduction to Thorax and Thoracic Cage
Fig. 14.12 Acquired hiatal (sliding) hernia: A, normal position of stomach; B, herniated stomach.
Fig. 14.11 Posterolateral hernia of diaphragm. (Source: 
Fig. 17.8, Page 190, Textbook of Clinical Embryology, 
Vishram Singh. Copyright Elsevier 2012, All rights reserved.)
Coils of 
intestine
Spleen
Herniated into
thoracic cavity
Stomach herniating into
thoracic cavity
Apparent
dextrocardia
Lung
Liver
Compressed lung
Cardiac angle
Phrenicoesophageal 
ligament
Diaphragm
Peritoneum
Diaphragmatic fascia
(endoabdominal fascia)
Peritoneum
Phrenicoesophageal 
ligament
Gastroesophageal 
junction displaced 
into chest
Cardiac angle absent
Herniated stomach
Diaphragm
Septum
transversum
Pleuroperitoneal
membrane
Body wall
Dorsal mesentery of
esophagus
Fig. 14.10 Developmental components of the diaphragm.
Development
The diaphragm develops in the region of neck from the 
following four structures (Fig. 14.10):
1. Septum transversum, ventrally.
2. Pleuroperitoneal membranes at the sides.
3. Dorsal mesentery of esophagus, dorsally.
4. Body wall, peripherally.
Most probably
 
 Central tendon of diaphragm develops from septum 
transversum.
 
 Domes of diaphragm develop from pleuroperitoneal 
membrane.
 
 Part of diaphragm around the esophagus develops from the 
dorsal mesentery of esophagus. 
 
 Peripheral part of diaphragm, develops from the body 
wall.
For details of development, consult any textbook of 
Embryology.
N.B. The musculature of diaphragm develops from 3rd, 
4th, and 5th cervical myotomes (C3, C4, C5), hence it 
receives its motor innervations from C3, C4, and C5 
spinal segments (i.e., phrenic nerve). Later, when 
diaphragm descends from the neck to its definitive 
position (i.e., thoraco-abdominal junction), its nerve 
supply is dragged down. This explains the long course of 
the phrenic nerve.
--- Page 209 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
rolls upwards in the hernial sac through this defect, until 
it becomes upside down in the thoracic cavity. An 
important feature of paraesophageal hernia is that the 
normal relationship of gastroesophageal junction in 
relation to diaphragm is not disturbed.
Acquired
The acquired diaphragmatic hernias may be either traumatic 
or hiatal (sliding).
1. Traumatic hernia: It may occur due to an open injury to 
the diaphragm by the penetrating wounds or closed 
injury to the diaphragm in road traffic accidents leading 
to sudden severe increase in the intra-abdominal 
pressure.
2. Hiatal (sliding) hernia (Fig. 14.12): This is the 
commonest of all the internal hernias. In sliding hernia, 
the gastroesophageal junction and cardiac end of 
stomach slides up into the thoracic cavity, but only 
anterolateral portion of the herniated stomach is 
covered by peritoneum, therefore the stomach itself is 
not within the hernial sac. The hiatal hernia is caused 
by the weakness of the diaphragmatic muscle 
surrounding the esophageal opening and increased 
intra-abdominal pressure. This may cause regurgitation 
of acid contents of stomach into the esophagus leading 
to peptic esophagitis. The patient complains of heart 
burn. The sliding hernia is usually associated with short 
esophagus.
Diaphragmatic hernias
Congenital
The various types of congenital diaphragmatic hernias are 
as follows:
1. Posterolateral 
hernia 
(commonest 
congenital 
diaphragmatic hernia; Fig. 14.11): In this condition, there 
is herniation of abdominal contents into the thoracic 
cavity, which compress the lung and heart. The herniation 
occurs through the gap (pleuroperitoneal hiatus) between 
the costal and vertebral origins of the diaphragm called 
foramen of Bochdalek. The gap remains due to failure of 
closure of pleuroperitoneal canal. It occurs commonly on 
the left side (for details see Clinical and Surgical 
Anatomy, 2nd edition by Vishram Singh).
2. Retrosternal hernia: It occurs through the gap between 
the muscular slips of origin from xiphisternum and 7th 
costal cartilage (space of Larry or foramen of Morgagni). 
It is more common on the right side. Thus hernial sac 
usually lies between pericardium and right pleura. 
Usually it causes no symptoms in the infants, but in later 
age, the patients complain of discomfort and dysphagia 
(difficulty in swallowing).
3. Paraesophageal hernia: In this condition, there is defect 
in the diaphragm to the right and anterior to the 
esophageal opening. The anterior wall of the stomach
Clinical correlation
--- Page 211 ---
Bones and Joints of 
the Thorax
CHAPTER
BONES OF THE THORAX
The bones of the thorax form the major part of the thoracic 
cage and provide support and protection to viscera (e.g., 
heart and lungs) present within the thoracic cavity. The 
thoracic cage is not static in nature, but dynamic as it keeps 
on moving at its various joints.
The bones of the thorax are:
1. Sternum.
2. Twelve pairs of ribs.
3. Twelve thoracic vertebrae.
STERNUM
The sternum (breast bone; Fig. 15.1A and B) is an elongated 
flat bone, which lies in the anterior median part of the chest 
wall. It is about 7 cm long.
PARTS
The sternum consists of the following three parts:
1. Upper part, the manubrium sterni/episternum.
2. Middle part, the body/mesosternum.
3. Lower part, the xiphoid process/metasternum.
The sternum resembles a dagger or a small sword in shape. 
Its three parts—manubrium, body, and xiphoid process 
represent the handle, blade, and point of the sword, 
respectively.
The upper part of sternum is broad and thick, whereas its 
lower part is thin and pointed. Its anterior surface is slightly 
rough and convex, while its posterior surface is smooth and 
slightly concave.
The manubrium and body of sternum lie at an angle of 
163° to each other, which increases slightly during 
inspiration and decreases during expiration. The angle 
Fig. 15.1 Features of the sternum: A, anterior aspect; B, lateral aspect.
Manubrium
Clavicular notch
Notches for
costal cartilage
Sternal angle
Body
Xiphisternal joint
Xiphoid process
Manubrium
Suprasternal notch
Clavicular notch
Body
Xiphoid process
Notches for cartilages
--- Page 212 ---
Bones and Joints of the Thorax
between long axis of manubrium and long axis of body of 
sternum is about 17°.
Anatomical Position
In anatomical position, the sternum as a whole is directed 
downwards and inclined slightly forward with its rough 
convex surface facing anteriorly. Its broad end is directed 
upwards and lower pointed end is directed downwards.
FEATURES AND ATTACHMENTS
Manubrium (Episternum; Figs. 15.1 and 15.2)
It is roughly quadrilateral in shape. It lies opposite to the 
third and fourth thoracic vertebrae. It is the thickest and 
strongest part of the sternum and presents the following 
features:
1. Two surfaces—anterior and posterior.
2. Four borders—superior, inferior, and lateral (right and 
left).
Anterior surface on each side provides attachment to the 
sternal head of sternocleidomastoid and pectoralis major 
muscles.
Posterior surface is smooth and forms anterior boundary of 
superior mediastinum.
 
 On each side, it provides attachment to two muscles:
(a) sternohyoid at the level of clavicular notch, and
(b) sternothyroid at the level of facet for 1st costal 
cartilage.
 
 Lower half is related to arch of aorta.
 
 Upper half is related to three branches of the arch of aorta, 
viz. brachiocephalic artery, left common carotid artery, 
left subclavian artery, and left brachiocephalic vein.
Upper border is thick, rounded, and concave. It presents a 
notch called suprasternal notch or jugular notch.
 
 It provides attachment to the interclavicular ligament.
 
 Clavicular notch on either side of suprasternal notch 
articulates with the clavicle to form sternoclavicular joint.
Lateral border presents two articular facets:
 
 Upper facet articulates with the 1st costal cartilage to form 
primary cartilaginous joint.
 
 Lower demifacet along with other demifacet in the body 
of sternum articulates with the 2nd costal cartilage.
Lower border articulates with the upper end of the body of 
sternum to form secondary cartilaginous joint called 
manubriosternal joint. The manubrium makes a slight angle 
with the body at this junction called sternal angle or angle of 
Louis. It is recognized by the presence of a transverse ridge 
on the anterior aspect of the sternum.
Body (Mesosternum; Figs 15.1 and 15.2)
The features of the body are as follows:
1. It is longer, narrower, and thinner than the manubrium.
2. It is broadest at its lower end.
3. Its upper end articulates with the manubrium at the 
sternal angle to form manubriosternal joint.
Bare area of
pericardium
4th costal
cartilage
Sternothyroid 
Lines of pleural reflection
Sternocostalis
Area related to pleura
Sternohyoid
Jugular notch
Sternal head of 
sternocleidomastoid 
Pectoralis major
Clavicle
Rectus
abdominis
Diaphragm
Clavicle
Sternal angle
Sternal angle
Fig. 15.2 Attachments on the sternum: A, anterior surface; B, posterior surface.
--- Page 213 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
4. Its lower end articulates with the xiphoid process to 
form primary cartilaginous xiphisternal joint.
5. Its anterior surface presents three faint transverse ridges 
indicating the lines of fusion of four small segments 
called sternebrae. The anterior surface on each side gives 
origin to the pectoralis major muscle.
6. Its posterior surface is smooth and slightly concave.
(a) Lower part of posterior surface gives origin to 
sternocostalis muscle.
(b) On the right side of median plane, posterior surface 
is related to pleura, which separates it from the lung.
(c) On the left side of median plane, upper half of the 
body is related to the pleura and lower half to the 
pericardium (bare area of the pericardium)
7. Its lateral border articulates with the 2nd–7th costal 
cartilages (to form synovial joints. Strictly speaking, 2nd 
costal cartilage articulates at the side of manubriosternal 
junction and 7th costal cartilage articulates at the 
xiphisternal junction).
Xiphoid Process (Metasternum; Figs 15.1 and 15.2)
1. It is the lowest and smallest part of the sternum.
2. It varies greatly in size and shape.
3. It may be bifid or perforated.
4. Its anterior surface provides insertion to the medial 
fibres of the rectus abdominis.
5. Its posterior surface gives origin to the sternal fibres of 
the diaphragm.
6. Its tip provides attachment to the upper end of linea 
alba.
Muscles attached on the posterior and anterior surfaces of 
sternum are summarized below:
Muscle attached on the 
anterior surface of the 
sternum
Muscles attached on the 
posterior surface of the 
sternum
• Sternal head of 
sternocleidomastoid 
• Sternohyoid 
• Sternothyroid 
• Pectoralis major
• Sternocostalis
• Rectus abdominis
• Diaphragm (sternal fibres)
N.B. Features of interest at the sternal angle: Sternal angle 
can be felt as a transverse ridge on the sternum about 5 cm 
below the suprasternal notch. The sternal angle is an 
important surface bony landmark for many anatomical 
events accurate this level. These are:
• Second costal cartilage articulates, on either side, with 
the sternum at this level, hence this level is used for 
counting the ribs.
• It lies at the level of intervertebral disc between T4 and 
T5 vertebrae.
• Horizontal plane passing through this level separates 
superior mediastinum from inferior mediastinum.
• Ascending aorta ends at this level.
• Arch of aorta begins and ends at this level.
• Descending aorta begins at this level.
• Trachea bifurcates into right and left principal bronchi at 
this level.
• Pulmonary trunk divides into right and left pulmonary 
arteries at this level.
• Upper border of heart lies at this level.
• Azygos vein arches over the root of right lung to end in 
the superior vena cava.
• Sternal puncture: Manubrium sterni is the preferred site for 
bone marrow aspiration because it is subcutaneous and 
readily accessible. The bone marrow sample is required for 
hematological examination. A thick needle is inserted into 
the upper part of manubrium to avoid injury to arch of aorta 
which lies behind the lower part. Sternal puncture is not 
advisable in children because in them the plates of compact 
bone of sternum are very thin and if needle passes through 
and through the manubrium it will damage the arch of aorta 
and its branches, leading to fatal hemorrhage.
• Mid-sternotomy: To gain access to the mediastinum for 
surgical operations on heart and great blood vessels, the 
sternum is often divided in the median plane called mid-
sternotomy.
• Funnel chest (pectus excavatum): It is an abnormal 
shape of thoracic cage in which chest is compressed 
anteroposteriorly and sternum is pushed backward by the 
overgrowth of the ribs and may compress the heart.
• Pigeon chest (pectus carinatum): It is an abnormal 
shape of thoracic cage in which chest is compressed from 
side-to-side and sternum projects forward and downward 
like a keel of a boat.
• Sternal fracture: It is common in automobile accidents; 
e.g., when the driver’s chest is hit against the steering 
wheel, the sternum is often fractured at the sternal angle. 
The backward displacement of fractured fragments may 
damage aorta, heart, or liver and cause severe bleeding 
which may prove fatal.
Clinical correlation
OSSIFICATION
The sternum develops from two vertical cartilaginous plates 
(sternal plates), which fuse in the midline.
The sternum ossifies from six double centres, viz.
1. One for manubrium.
2. Four for body.
3. One for xiphoid process.
Appearance
The centers appear in descending order for different parts of 
sternum as follows:
--- Page 214 ---
Bones and Joints of the Thorax
1. Manubrium: 5th month
2. Body
(a) First sternebra: 6th month
(b) Second sternebra: 7th month
(c) Third sternebra: 8th month 
 
of IUL*
(d) Fourth sternebra: 9th month
3. Xiphoid process: 3rd year
Fusion
The fusion occurs as follows:
1. Fusion between sternal plates takes place from below 
upwards. It begins at puberty and completed by 25 years.
2. The xiphoid process fuses with the body at the age of 40 
years.
3. Manubrium does not fuse with the body. As a result, the 
secondary cartilaginous manubriosternal joint usually 
persists throughout life. In about 10% individuals, 
fusion occurs in old age.
Sternal foramen and cleft sternum: The two sternal plates 
fuse in caudocranial direction. Sometimes sternebrae fail to 
fuse in the midline, as a result defect occurs in the body of 
sternum in the form of sternal foramen or cleft sternum. The 
cleft sternum is often associated with ectopia cordis.
Clinical correlation
RIBS
The ribs are flat, ribbon-like, elastic bony arches, which 
extend from thoracic vertebrae posteriorly to the lateral 
borders of the sternum anteriorly. Their anterior ends are 
connected to the costal cartilage. The ribs along with its 
costal cartilage constitute the costa. The ribs and their costal 
cartilages form greater part of the thoracic skeleton.
Number
Normally there are 12 pairs of ribs (but occurrence of 
accessory cervical or lumbar rib may increase them to 13 
pairs or absence of 12th rib may reduce them to 11 pairs).
Arrangement and General Outline
1. The ribs are arranged one below the other and the gaps 
between the adjacent ribs are called intercostals spaces.
2. The length of ribs increases from 1st to 7th rib and then 
gradually decreases; hence, seventh rib is the longest rib.
3. The transverse diameter of thorax increases progressively 
from 1st to 8th rib, hence 8th rib has the greatest lateral 
projection.
4. The ribs are arranged obliquely, i.e., their anterior ends 
lie at lower level than their posterior ends (Fig. 15.3).
5. The obliquity of ribs increases progressively from 1st to 
9th rib, hence 9th rib is most obliquely placed.
6. The width of ribs gradually reduced from above 
downward.
The anterior ends of first seven ribs are connected to the 
sternum through their costal cartilages. The cartilages at the 
anterior ends of 8th, 9th, and 10th ribs are joined to the next 
higher cartilage. The anterior ends of 11th and 12th ribs are 
free and therefore called floating ribs.
N.B.
• The 10th rib usually have free anterior ends in Japanese.
• First rib slopes downwards along its entire extent.
• The middle of each costal arch (consisting of a rib and its 
costal cartilage) except the first rib lies at a lower level 
than a straight line joining the two ends of the costa 
(Fig. 15.3).
CLASSIFICATION
A. According to features
1. Typical ribs: 3rd–9th.
2. Atypical ribs: 1st, 2nd, 10th, 11th, and 12th.
The typical ribs have same general features, whereas the 
atypical ribs have special features and therefore can be 
differentiated from the remaining ribs.
B. According to relation with the sternum
1. True ribs: 1st–7th (i.e., upper 7 ribs).
2. False ribs: 8th–12th (i.e., lower 5 ribs).
True ribs articulate with the sternum anteriorly, whereas 
false ribs do not articulate with the sternum anteriorly.
C. According to articulation
1. Vertebrosternal ribs: 1st–7th.
2. Vertebrochondral ribs: 8th–10th.
3. Vertebral (floating) ribs: 11th and 12th.
*Intrauterine life.
Line joining the anterior and
posterior ends of the costal
arch 
Costal arch 
Fig. 15.3 Costal arch (side view).
--- Page 215 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
The vertebrosternal ribs articulate posteriorly with vertebrae 
and anteriorly with the sternum.
The vertebrochondral ribs articulate posteriorly with 
vertebrae and anteriorly their cartilages join the cartilage of 
the higher rib.
The vertebral or floating ribs articulate posteriorly with 
the vertebrae but their anterior ends are free.
TYPICAL RIBS (Fig. 15.4)
Parts
Each rib has three parts: (a) anterior end, (b) posterior end, 
and (c) shaft.
The anterior end bears a concave depression.
The posterior end consists of head, neck, and tubercle.
The shaft is the longest part and extends between anterior 
and posterior ends. It is flattened and has inner and outer 
surfaces and upper and lower borders. It is curved with 
convexity directed outwards and bears a costal groove on its 
inner surface near the lower border. Five centimeters away 
from tubercle, it abruptly changes its direction, this is called 
angle of the rib.
Side Determination and Anatomical Position
The side of the rib can be determined by holding it in such a 
way that its posterior end having head, neck, and tubercle is 
directed posteriorly, its concavity faces medially and its sharp 
border is directed inferiorly.
In an anatomical position, the posterior end is higher and 
nearer the median plane than the anterior end.
Features and Attachments
Anterior (costal) end
It bears a small cup-shaped depression, which joins the 
corresponding costal cartilage to form a primary 
cartilaginous costochondral joint.
Posterior end
It presents head, neck, and tubercle.
Head
It has two articular facets: lower and upper.
1. The lower larger facet articulates with the body of 
numerically corresponding vertebra.
2. The upper smaller facet articulates with the next higher 
vertebra.
The crest separating the two articular facets lies 
opposite the intervertebral disc.
Neck
1. It lies in front of the transverse process of the 
corresponding vertebra.
2. It has two borders—superior and inferior, and two 
surfaces—anterior and posterior.
3. The upper border is sharp crest like, whereas the lower 
border is rounded.
4. The posterior surface is rough and pierced by foramina.
Tubercle
1. It is situated on the outer surface of the rib at the 
junction of neck and shaft.
2. It is divided into two parts—medial articular part and 
lateral non-articular part. The articular part bears a small 
oval facet, which articulates with the transverse process 
of corresponding vertebra. The non-articular part is 
rough and provides attachment to ligaments.
Shaft
1. It is thin and flattened.
2. It presents two surfaces—outer and inner, two 
borders—upper and lower, and two angles—posterior 
and anterior.
Borders
Superior border
The superior border is thick and rounded, and presents outer 
and inner lips:
Fig. 15.4 Features of a typical rib.
Outer
surface
Shaft
Angle of
the rib
Oblique
line
Inner surface
Costal groove
Lower border
Upper border
Anterior end of rib
5 cm
Upper
articular facet
Crest for
intra-articular
ligament
Lower
articular facet
Head
Neck
Articular part
Non-articular part
Tubercle
Cup-shaped
small depression
for costal cartilage
--- Page 217 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
Side Determination
Side of the first rib can be determined by holding the rib in 
such a way that:
(a) its larger end is directed anteriorly and its smaller end is 
directed posteriorly,
(b) the surface of its shaft having two grooves separated by a 
ridge is directed superiorly, and
(c) its concave border is directed inwards and its convex 
border is directed outwards.
N.B. Trick for students for side determination of first rib:
Keep the rib on the table top considering its position in your 
own body. Now note that the rib belongs to the side on 
which it’s both ends touch the surface. If the rib is placed on 
the wrong side, then only its anterior end will be touching 
the surface.
Features and Attachments
Inner border
1. It presents a scalene tubercle about its middle. Tubercle 
and adjoining part of the upper surface provides 
attachment to the scalenus anterior muscle.
2. It provides attachment to the Sibson’s fascia (suprapleural 
membrane).
Outer border
It provides origin to the first digitation of serratus anterior 
about its middle, just behind the groove for the subclavian 
artery.
Superior (upper) surface
It is crossed obliquely by two shallow grooves (anterior 
and posterior) separated by a slight ridge. The ridge is 
continuous with the scalene tubercle. The anterior groove 
lodges subclavian vein, while posterior groove lodges the 
subclavian artery and lower trunk of the brachial plexus.
The area behind posterior groove up to the costal tubercle 
provides attachment to the scalenus medius muscle.
3. The area in front anterior groove and near the anterior 
end provides attachment to subclavius muscle
(anteriorly) and costoclavicular ligament (posteriorly).
Lower surface
It is related to the costal pleura.
Neck
1. It is elongated and directed upwards, backwards, and 
laterally.
2. The following structures form anterior relations of neck
from medial to lateral side:
(a) Sympathetic chain
(b) First posterior intercostal Vein
(c) Superior intercostal Artery
(d) Ventral ramus of first thoracic Nerve.
Memory device: Chain pulling the VAN.
Second Rib (Fig. 15.6)
Distinguishing Features and Attachments
1. Its length is twice that of the second rib.
2. Its shaft is sharply/highly curved.
3. Its shaft is not twisted; hence both the ends of rib touch 
the table top when placed on it.
4. Near its middle, the outer convex surface of shaft 
presents a rough impression or prominent tubercle, 
which provides attachment to the serratus anterior 
muscle (lower part of first and whole of second 
digitation).
5. The outer surface of the shaft is directed outwards and 
upwards, while inner surface of the shaft is directed 
inwards and downwards.
6. Posterior part of internal surface presents a short costal 
groove.
7. The upper border and adjoining part of upper surface 
provide attachment to the scalenus posterior and 
serratus posterior superior muscles.
Tenth Rib
Distinguishing Features
It has single articular facet on its head, which articulates with 
the body of corresponding thoracic vertebra.
It is slightly shorter than the typical rib.
Eleventh Rib
Distinguishing Features
1. It has single large, articular facet on its head.
2. It has no neck and no tubercle.
3. Its anterior end is pointed and tipped with cartilage.
4. It has slight angle and a shallow costal groove.
5. Its inner surface is directed upwards and inwards.
6. It has a slight angle.
Twelfth Rib (Fig. 15.7)
Distinguishing Features
The 12th rib has the same features as the 11th except that:
1. It has no angle.
2. It has no costal groove.
3. It is much shorter than 11th.
Side Determination
The side of 12th rib can be determined by keeping the rib in 
such a way that:
1. Its pointed anterior end is directed anterolaterally and 
its broader end posteromedially.
2. Its slightly concave surface faces inwards and upwards.
3. Its sharper border is directed inferiorly.
--- Page 219 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
Upper border
The upper border provides attachment to the external and 
internal intercostal muscles.
OSSIFICATION
 
 All the ribs ossify by four centers except 1st, 11th, and 
12th ossify,
(a) One primary center for shaft.
(b) Three secondary centers: one for head, one for 
articular part of tubercle and one for non-articular 
part of the tubercle.
 
 First rib ossifies by three centers: one primary centre for 
shaft and two secondary centers—one for head and one 
for tubercle.
 
 Eleventh and 12th ribs ossify by two centers each: one 
primary center for the shaft and one secondary centre for 
the head.
 
 Primary centers of all the ribs appear at the 8th week of 
IUL.
 
 Secondary centers of all the ribs appear at puberty.
 
 Fusion in all the ribs occurs at the age of 20 years.
• Cervical rib: The costal element of the C7 vertebra may 
elongate to form a cervical rib in about 5% individuals. The 
condition may be unilateral or bilateral. It occurs more often 
unilaterally and somewhat more frequently on the right 
side. The cervical rib may have a blind tip or the tip may be 
connected to the 1st rib by fibrous band or cartilage or 
bone. It may compress the lower trunk of brachial plexus 
and subclavian artery. The compression produces: (a) pain 
along the medial side of forearm and hand and 
(b) disturbance in the circulation of the upper limb (for detail 
see Clinical and Surgical Anatomy by Vishram Singh.)
• Lumbar rib (Gorilla rib): It develops from the costal 
element of L1 vertebra. Its incidence is more common 
than the cervical rib, but remains undiagnosed as it 
usually does not cause symptoms. It may be confused 
with the fracture of transverse process of L1 vertebra.
• Fracture of rib: Usually the middle ribs are involved in the 
fracture. The rib commonly fractures at its angle (posterior 
angle) as it is the weakest point.
• Flail chest (stove-in-chest): When ribs are fractured at 
two sites (e.g., anteriorly as well as at an angle), the flail 
chest occurs. The flail segments of ribs are sucked in during 
inspiration and pushed out during expiration leading to a 
clinical condition called paradoxical respiration).
Clinical correlation
N.B.
• Fracture of ribs is rare in children as the ribs are elastic in 
them.
• First two ribs (1st and 2nd ribs) are protected by clavicle 
and last two ribs (11th and 12th) are mobile (floating), 
hence they are rarely injured.
THORACIC VERTEBRAE
There are 12 thoracic vertebrae. They are identified by the 
presence of costal facet/facets on the sides of their bodies for 
articulation with the heads of the ribs. These articulations are 
characteristic of thoracic vertebrae as they are not found in 
the cervical lumbar and sacral vertebrae. The size of thoracic 
vertebrae increases gradually from above downwards.
The bodies of upper thoracic vertebrae is gradually 
changed from cervical to thoracic type and those of lower 
from thoracic to lumbar type. Thus the body of T1 vertebra 
is typically cervical in type and that of T12 vertebra is 
typically lumbar in type.
N.B. Presence of the articular facet(s) on the side of the 
body is the cardinal feature of the thoracic vertebrae.
CLASSIFICATION
According to the features, the thoracic vertebrae are classified 
into two types:
1. Typical: second to eighth.
2. Atypical: first and ninth to twelfth.
TYPICAL THORACIC VERTEBRAE
Characteristic Features (Fig. 15.8)
1. Presence of articular facets on each side of the body and 
on front of transverse processes for articulation with the 
ribs.
2. Body is heart shaped, particularly in the midthoracic 
region when viewed from above. Its transverse and 
anteroposterior measurements are almost equal.
3. Vertebral foramen is circular.
4. Spinous process is long, slender, and directed downwards.
5. Pedicle is attached to the upper part of the body, thus 
making the inferior vertebral notch deeper.
Parts
The thoracic vertebra consists of two parts:
1. Body.
2. Vertebral arch.
The body and vertebral arch enclose a vertebral foramen 
in which lies the spinal cord surrounded by its meninges.
Body
1. It is heart shaped, when viewed from above.
2. Its anteroposterior and transverse dimensions are almost 
equal.
3. On each side, the bodies are two costal facets, superior, 
and inferior.
--- Page 220 ---
Bones and Joints of the Thorax
 Superior facet is larger and situated near the upper 
border of the body in front of the root of the pedicle.
 
 Inferior facet is smaller and situated near the lower 
border in front of the inferior vertebral notch.
Vertebral arch: It consists of a pair of pedicles anteriorly and 
two laminae, posteriorly:
 
 The pedicles (right and left) are short rounded bony bars, 
which project backwards and laterally from the posterior 
aspect of the body.
 
 The laminae (right and left)—each pedicle continues 
posteromedially as a vertical plate of bone. The laminae of 
two sides join with each other in the posterior midline.
 
 The spinous process arises in the midline where the two 
laminae meet posteriorly.
 
 Two transverse processes, one on either side arises from the 
junction of pedicle and lamina.
 
 Two paired articular process, two on each side spring from 
lamina, the superior articular process project rather more 
from pedicle than lamina, the inferior articular process 
springs from a lamina.
Features and Attachments
Body
1. The upper larger costal facet (actually demifacet) 
articulates 
with 
head 
numerically 
corresponding rib.
2. The lower smaller costal facet (actually demifacet) 
articulates with the head of the next lower rib.
3. Anterior and posterior surfaces of body provide 
attachment to the anterior and posterior longitudinal 
ligaments, respectively. These ligaments are attached to 
both the upper end lower borders of the body.
4. Posterior surface of body is marked by vascular foramina 
for basivertebral veins, which are covered by the posterior 
longitudinal ligament.
Pedicles
1. They are attached nearer the superior border of body, as 
a result the superior vertebral notch is shallow and the 
inferior vertebral notch is deep.
2. The deep inferior vertebral notch together with small 
superior vertebral notch of next lower vertebra 
completes the intervertebral foramen, through which 
spinal nerve leaves the vertebral canal.
Laminae
1. They are short, broad, and thick; and overlap each other 
from above downwards.
2. Their margins give attachment to the ligamenta flava.
Superior Articular Processes
The articular facets on superior articular process are directed 
backwards and slightly laterally and articulate with the 
inferior articular facet of the next higher vertebra.
Inferior Articular Processes
The articular facet on inferior articular process is flat and 
faces forwards and little downwards and medially. It 
articulates with the superior articular facet of the next lower 
vertebra.
Transverse Processes
They are large club shaped and projects laterally and slightly 
backwards.
 
 The facet on the anterior aspect of the tip of transverse 
process articulates with the tubercle of the numerically 
corresponding rib.
 
 They provide attachments to the ligaments and muscles 
related to the rib cage and back.
Spine
The spines are directed downwards and backwards. The 
spinous processes of middle four vertebrae (i.e., from 5th to 
Fig. 15.8 Features of a typical thoracic vertebra: A, superior view; B, lateral view.
Spine
Superior
articular process
Transverse process
Vertebral foramen
Articular facet
for tubercle
of the rib
Pedicle
Costal facet for
the head of rib
Lamina
Body
Spine
Transverse process
Superior articular
process
Inferior vertebral notch
Inferior articular process
Articular facet for
tubercle of the rib
Superior
costal facet
Inferior costal
facet
--- Page 221 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
8th) are very long, vertical, and overlap each other. The 
spinous processes of upper four and lower four vertebrae are 
relatively short and less oblique in direction (Fig. 15.9).
N.B.
• The spinous process of T1 vertebra is most prominent 
and horizontal in its projection and can be palpated at 
the back of the root of neck just below the lower end of 
median nuchal furrow.
• The spinous process of T8 vertebra is longest.
The backward slant decreases. At the 11th vertebra, the 
spine is directed almost downwards. It is termed anticlinical 
vertebra, below this level spine slants dorsally and backwards. 
The spines provide attachment to the supraspinous and 
interspinous ligaments.
N.B. The spines of middle four thoracic vertebrae are 
almost horizontal.
ATYPICAL THORACIC VERTEBRAE (Fig. 15.10)
First Thoracic Vertebra
Distinguishing Features
1. It resembles the 7th cervical vertebra.
2. The body is narrow anteroposteriorly. Its upper surface 
is concave from side to side with an upward projecting 
lip on either sides. The anterior border of inferior surface 
projects downwards.
3. The superior articular facet on the side of the body is 
circular and articulates with the whole of the facet on 
the head of the first rib.
Middle 4 spines
Lower 4 spines
Upper 4 spines
Fig. 15.9 Showing inclination of the spinous processes of 
thoracic vertebrae.
Fig. 15.10 Features of atypical thoracic vertebrae.
• Only superior costal demifacet on the side of body
• Only superior large costal facet (semilunar/oval) on the
 side of body encroaching the upper part of pedicle
• Only single circular costal facet on the side of
 body extending on the root of pedicle
• No articular facet on the transverse process
• Resembles L1 vertebra
• Transverse process small with three tubercles
• No articular facet on transverse process
• Only single large costal facet on the side of pedicle
• Articular facet on inferior articular process everted
ATYPICAL FEATURES
• Body cervical in type
• Superior costal facet on the side of body circular
• Deep superior vertebral notch
• Horizontal long spine
--- Page 222 ---
Bones and Joints of the Thorax
4. The superior vertebral notches are deep (i.e., clearly 
seen) as in cervical vertebra.
5. The inferior articular facet is half (i.e., demifacet) 
articulates with the head of the 2nd rib.
6. The spinal process is nearly horizontal.
Ninth Thoracic Vertebra
Distinguishing Features
1. The lower costal facet on each side of body is absent
2. The body on each side possesses only superior costal 
facet (demifacet) for articulation with the 9th rib.
Tenth Thoracic Vertebra
Distinguishing Features
The body on each side possesses only single articular facet, 
which is semilunar or oval for articulation with the 10th 
rib. The costal facet encroaches on the upper part of the 
pedicle.
Eleventh Thoracic Vertebra
Distinguishing Features
1. Body on each side possesses single large circular costal 
facet for articulation with the head of the 11th rib. The 
costal facet extends onto the root of the pedicle.
2. Transverse processes are small and do not present costal 
facet on their tips (as 11th rib has no tubercle).
Twelfth Thoracic Vertebra
Distinguishing Features
1. It resembles the first lumbar vertebra.
2. Body on each side possesses a large single costal facet, 
which is more on the lower part of the pedicle than on 
the body.
3. Transverse process is small and presents three tubercles—
superior, middle, and inferior. It has no articular facet 
(as 12th rib has no tubercle).
The three tubercles of the transverse process of 12th 
thoracic vertebra correspond with the following processes of 
the lumbar vertebra:
(a) Superior tubercle corresponds to the mamillary process
of lumbar vertebra.
(b) Middle tubercle corresponds to the true transverse 
process of lumbar vertebra.
(c) Inferior tubercle corresponds to the accessory process of 
the lumbar vertebra.
The important distinguishing features of atypical thoracic 
vertebrae (i.e., 1st, 9th, 10th, 11th, and 12th) are enumerated 
in Table 15.1.
Table 15.1 Distinguishing features atypical thoracic 
vertebrae
Vertebra
Distinguishing features
• Resembles 7th cervical vertebra
• Superior costal facet is circular
• Superior vertebral notch is deep and clearly seen
• Presence of only superior demifacet
• Presence of only single large complete costal facet
• Presence of single large circular costal facet
• Absence of articular facet on transverse process
• Resembles 1st lumbar vertebra
• Presence of single large circular facet extending 
onto the root of tubercle
• Transverse process presents three tubercles: 
superior, inferior, and lateral 
COSTAL CARTILAGES
The costal cartilages are made up of hyaline cartilage and are 
mainly responsible for providing elasticity and mobility of 
the chest wall.
First to 7th cartilages connect the respective ribs with the 
lateral border of the sternum and they increase in length 
from 1st to 7th.
Eighth to 10th cartilages at their anterior ends are 
connected with the lower border of the cartilage above and 
there is a gradual decrease in length from 8th to 10th.
Eleventh and 12th cartilages end in free pointed 
extremities.
JOINTS OF THE THORAX
The joints of thorax are as follows:
1. Costovertebral.
2. Costotransverse.
3. Costochondral.
4. Interchondral.
5. Manubriosternal.
6. Intervertebral.
COSTOVERTEBRAL JOINTS (Fig. 15.11)
These joints are formed by articulation of articular facets on 
the head of ribs and costal facets on the bodies of thoracic 
vertebrae.
The head of typical rib articulates with the body of 
numerically corresponding vertebra and also with the body 
of next higher vertebra.
Type
Synovial type of plane joint.
--- Page 224 ---
Bones and Joints of the Thorax
It is a secondary cartilaginous joint (symphysis) between 
manubrium and body of sternum. It permits slight sliding 
movements of body of sternum on the manubrium during 
respiration.
N.B. The manubriosternal joint is not a typical symphysis 
because as a rule bones taking part in the formation of a 
symphysis do not undergo bony union, but in many 
individuals after 30 years of age bony union does take place 
between the manubrium and the body of sternum.
INTERVERTEBRAL JOINTS
The intervertebral joints are formed
(a) between the bodies of the vertebrae, and
(b) between the articular processes of the vertebra.
JOINTS BETWEEN THE BODIES OF THE VERTEBRAE
These are secondary cartilaginous joint. The inferior and 
superior surfaces of the adjacent vertebral bodies are covered 
by thin plates of hyaline cartilages, which in turn are united 
by fibrocartilaginous intervertebral disc. The disc consists of 
an outer rim by fibrocartilage—the annulus fibrosus and a 
central core of gelatinous substance—the nucleus pulposus. 
These joints are held together by anterior and posterior 
longitudinal ligaments of the vertebral column (for details 
see General Anatomy by Vishram Singh).
JOINTS BETWEEN THE ARTICULAR PROCESSES
The joints between the superior and inferior articular 
processes of adjacent vertebrae are called facet (zygapophysial) 
Fig. 15.13 The articular processes of thoracic vertebra are 
set on an arc.
Articular process
joints. They are plane type of synovial joints and permit 
gliding movements. The zygapophysial joints of thoracic 
vertebrae are directed vertically. This limits flexion and 
extension, but facilitates rotation. The rotation is greatly 
facilitated because the articular process of thoracic vertebrae 
are set on an arc (Fig. 15.13). The ligaments are joint capsule, 
which encloses the articular surfaces. The accessory 
ligaments are: (a) ligaments flava between the laminae of 
adjacent vertebrae, (b) supraspinous, (c) infraspinous, and 
(d) intertransverse ligaments.
Movements
The movements of flexion and extension are best permitted 
in the cervical and the lumbar regions, while the rotatory 
movements are best seen in the thoracic region.
--- Page 226 ---
Thoracic Wall and 
Mechanism of 
Respiration
CHAPTER
The thoracic wall is formed posteriorly by the thoracic part 
of the vertebral column, anteriorly by the sternum and costal 
cartilages, and laterally by the ribs and the intercostal spaces. 
The floor of thorax is formed by the diaphragm and its roof 
is formed by suprapleural membranes. The diseases of 
thoracic viscera are the leading cause of death all over the 
world. Therefore, surface landmarks of the thorax are 
extremely important to the physicians in providing reference 
locations for performing inspection (visual observation), 
palpation (feeling with firm pressure), percussion (detecting 
densities through tapping), and auscultation (listening 
sounds with the stethoscope).
SURFACE LANDMARKS
BONY LANDMARKS
The bony landmarks of the thoracic wall are as follows 
(Fig. 16.1):
1. Suprasternal notch (jugular notch): It is felt just above 
the superior border of the manubrium sterni between 
the proximal medial ends of the two clavicles. It lies at 
the level of lower border of the body of T2 vertebra. The 
trachea can be palpated in this notch.
2. Sternal angle (angle of Louis): It is felt as a transverse 
ridge about 5 cm below the suprasternal notch. It marks 
the angle made between the manubrium and the body 
of the sternum (the angle between the long axis of 
manubrium and body of sternum is 163° posteriorly 
and 17° anteriorly). It lies at the level of intervertebral 
disc between the T4 and T5 vertebrae. The 2nd rib 
articulates on the either side with the sternum at this 
level. Hence it used as surface landmark for counting the 
ribs (for details see page 198).
3. Xiphisternal joint: It can be felt at the apex infrasternal/ 
subcostal angle formed by the meeting of anterior end 
of subcostal margins. The xiphisternal joint lies at the 
level of the upper border of the body of T9 vertebra.
4. Costal margin: It forms the lower boundary of the 
thorax on each side and is formed by the cartilages of the 
7th, 8th, 9th, and 10th ribs and the free ends of 11th and 
12th ribs. The lowest point of costal margin is formed by 
the 10th rib and lies at the level of L3 vertebra.
5. Subcostal angle: It is situated at the inferior end of the 
sternum between the sternal attachments of the 7th 
costal cartilage.
6. Thoracic vertebral spines: The first prominent spine 
felt at the lower end of nuchal furrow (midline furrow 
on the back of neck) is the spine of C7 vertebra 
(vertebra prominens). All the thoracic spines are 
counted below this level. For reference, the 3rd thoracic 
spine lies at the level of root of spine of scapula and 7th 
thoracic spine lies at the level of inferior angle of the 
scapula.
SOFT TISSUE LANDMARKS
1. Nipple: In males, the nipple is usually located in the 4th 
intercostal space about 4 in (10 cm) from the midsternal 
line. In females, its position varies considerably.
2. Apex beat of the heart: It is lowermost and outermost 
thrust of cardiac pulsation, which is felt in the left 5th 
intercostal space 3.5 in (9 cm) from the midsternal line 
or just medial to the midclavicular line.
LINES OF ORIENTATION (Fig. 16.1)
The following imaginary lines are often used to describe 
surface locations on the anterior and posterior chest wall.
1. Midsternal line: It runs vertically downwards in the 
median plane on the anterior aspect of the sternum.
2. Midclavicular line: It runs vertically downwards from 
the midpoint of the clavicle to the midinguinal point. It 
crosses the tip of the 9th costal cartilage.
3. Anterior axillary line: It runs vertically downwards from 
the anterior axillary fold.
--- Page 227 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
4. Midaxillary line: It runs vertically downwards from the 
point in the axilla located between the anterior and 
posterior axillary folds.
5. Posterior axillary line: It runs vertically downwards 
from the posterior axillary fold.
6. Scapular line: It runs vertically downwards on the 
posterior aspect of the chest passing through the inferior 
angle of the scapula with arms at the sides of the body.
COVERINGS OF THE THORACIC WALL
The thoracic wall is covered from superficial to deep by:
1. Skin.
2. Superficial fascia.
3. Deep fascia.
4. Muscles.
Skin: The skin covering thoracic wall is thin on its anterior 
aspect and thick on its back aspect. The distribution of hair 
is variable and depends on the age, sex, and race.
Cutaneous nerves: The cutaneous innervation on the front 
of thorax is provided by cutaneous branches of anterior 
primary rami of thoracic spinal nerves (T2 –T6) in sequence 
from above downwards by the T2 at the level of 2nd rib to 
the T6 at the level of xiphoid process. The skin above the 
level of 2nd rib is supplied by the anterior primary ramus of 
C4 via supraclavicular nerves.
N.B.
• The anterior rami of C5–T1 innervate the skin of the 
upper limb.
• The cutaneous innervation on the back of thorax (on 
either side of midline for about 5 cm) is provided by 
posterior rami of thoracic spinal nerves.
Superficial fascia: The superficial fascia is more dense on 
the posterior aspect of the chest to sustain the pressure of 
the body when lying in the supine position. The superficial 
fascia on the front of the chest contains breast (mammary 
gland), which is rudimentary in males and well-developed 
in adult females. The breast is described in detail in 
Chapter 3.
Deep fascia: The deep fascia is thin and ill-defined (except in 
pectoral region) to allow free movement of the thoracic wall 
during breathing.
Muscles: The thoracic wall is liberally covered by the 
following extrinsic muscles:
1. Muscles of upper limb:
(a) Pectoralis major and pectoralis minor muscles cover 
the front of thoracic wall.
(b) Serratus anterior covers the side of thoracic wall.
2. Muscles of abdomen: Rectus abdominis and external 
oblique covers the lower part of the front of thoracic 
wall.
3. Muscles of back:
(a) Trapezius and latissimus dorsi.
(b) Levator scapulae, rhomboideus major and minor.
(c) Serratus—posterior, superior, and inferior.
(d) Erector spinae.
N.B.
• The thoracic wall is more or less completely covered by 
extrinsic muscles except in the anterior and posterior 
median lines.
• On the back, the thoracic wall is thinly covered by 
musculature in the region of triangle of auscultation (see 
page 62).
Clavicle
Spine of
scapula
Inferior angle of
scapula
Scapular
line
Posterior
axillary line
2nd rib
7th rib
Inferior angle
of scapula
Suprasternal
notch
Midsternal
line
Midclavicular
line
Sternal angle
Nipple
Xiphisternal
joint
Subcostal
angle
Anterior
axillary line
Costal margin
Fig. 16.1 Surface landmarks on the thoracic wall: A, anterior aspect; B, posterior aspect.
--- Page 230 ---
Thoracic Wall and Mechanism of Respiration
Actions: Depressor of the ribs.
Sternocostalis (Fig. 16.2B)
The sternocostalis muscle one on either side is situated on 
the inner aspect of front of the chest wall (behind the 
sternum and costal cartilages) occupying the anterior part of 
the upper intercostal spaces, except the first space. The 
sternocostalis muscle intervenes between the anterior end of 
the intercostal nerves and the pleura.
Origin: It arises from (a) lower one-third of the posterior 
surface of the body of sternum, (b) posterior surface of the 
xiphoid process of the sternum, and (c) posterior surface of 
the costal cartilages of lower three or four ribs.
Insertion: The fibres diverge upwards and laterally as slips to 
be inserted into the lower border and inner surfaces of the 
costal cartilages of 2nd–6th ribs.
Nerve supply: By intercostal nerves.
Action: It draws down the costal cartilages in which it is 
inserted.
Levatores Costarum (12 Pairs)
These are a series of 12 small muscles placed on either side of 
the back of thorax, just lateral to the vertebral column.
Origin: It arises from the tip of transverse process from 7th 
to 11th thoracic vertebrae.
Insertion: Each muscle passes obliquely downwards and 
laterally to be inserted on to the upper edge and outer surface 
of the rib immediately below in the interval between the 
tubercle and angle.
Actions
1. Elevate and rotate the neck of rib in a forward 
direction.
2. Are rotators and lateral flexors of the vertebral 
column?
The origin insertion, extent, direction of fibres, nerve 
supply, and actions are given in Table 16.1.
INTERCOSTAL SPACES
The spaces between the two adjacent ribs (and their costal 
cartilages) are known as intercostal spaces. Thus there are 11 
intercostal spaces on either side.
The 3rd–6th spaces are typical intercostal spaces because 
the blood and nerve supply of 3rd–6th intercostal spaces is 
confined only to thorax.
Table 16.1 Intrinsic muscles of the thoracic wall
Muscle
Origin
Insertion
Extent
Direction of fibres
Nerve supply
Actions
1. External 
intercostal
Lower border of rib above
Upper border 
(outer lip) of 
rib below
From costochondral 
junction to tubercle of 
rib (anteriorly it 
continues as anterior 
intercostal membrane)
Downwards, 
forwards, and 
medially
Intercostal 
nerve of the 
same space
Elevates the 
rib during 
inspiration 
2. Internal 
intercostal
Floor of the costal groove of 
the rib above
Upper border 
(inner lip) of 
rib below
From lateral border of 
sternum to the angle of 
rib (posteriorly it 
continues as posterior 
intercostal membrane)
Upwards, forwards 
and medially
Intercostal 
nerve of same 
space
Elevates the 
rib during 
expiration
3. Transversus 
thoracis
(a) Intercostalis 
intimus
Inner surface of rib above
Inner surface 
of rib below
Confined to the middle 
2/4th of the intercostal 
space
Upwards, forwards 
and medially
Intercostal 
nerve of same 
space
Elevates the 
rib during 
expiration
(b) Subcostalis
Inner surface of rib near 
angle
Inner surface 
of 2nd or 3rd 
ribs below
Confined to posterior 
parts of lower spaces 
only
Upwards, forwards 
and medially
Intercostal 
nerves
Depressor of 
ribs
(c) Sternocostalis
– Lower 1/3rd of the 
posterior surface of the 
body of sternum
– Posterior surface of 
xiphoid process
– Posterior surface of costal 
cartilages of lower 3 or 
4ribs near sternum
Costal 
cartilages 2nd 
to 6th ribs
Inner surface of front 
wall of chest
Upwards and 
laterally
Intercostal 
nerves
Draws 2nd 
to 6th 
cartilages 
downwards
--- Page 231 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
CONTENTS OF A TYPICAL INTERCOSTAL SPACE
Each space contains the following structures (Fig. 16.4):
1. Three intercostal muscles, viz.
(a) External intercostal.
(b) Internal intercostal.
(c) Innermost intercostal (intercostalis intimus).
2. Intercostal nerves.
3. Intercostal arteries.
4. Intercostal veins.
5. Intercostal lymph vessels and lymph nodes.
N.B. Plane of neurovascular bundle in the intercostal space: 
The neurovascular bundle consisting of intercostal nerve 
and vessels lies between the internal intercostal and 
innermost intercostal muscles, i.e., between the intermediate 
and deepest layers of muscles.
They are arranged in the following order from above 
downwards:
1. Intercostal Vein.
2. Intercostal Artery.
3. Intercostal Nerve.
(Mnemonic: VAN)
INTERCOSTAL MUSCLES
Intercostal muscles are a group of muscles that are present in 
the intercostal space and help form and move the chest wall.
The following muscles constitute intercostal muscles:
1. External intercostal muscle.
2. Internal intercostal muscle.
3. Innermost intercostal muscle (intercostalis intimi).
N.B. Strictly speaking, the intercostalis intimi is not present 
in the intercostal space as it lies on the deeper aspects of 
the ribs.
Nerve supply: By intercostal nerves.
Actions
The actions of intercostal muscles are as follows:
1. They act as strong supports for the rib preventing their 
separation.
2. They act as elevators of the ribs during respiration. 
External intercostal muscles act during inspiration, 
while others act during expiration.
The intercostal muscles are described in detail on page 213–214.
INTERCOSTAL NERVES
The 12 pairs of thoracic spinal nerves supply the thoracic 
wall. As soon as they leave, the intervertebral foramina they 
divide into anterior and posterior rami (Fig. 16.5).
The anterior primary rami of upper 11 thoracic spinal 
nerves (T1–T11) are called intercostal nerves as they course 
through the intercostal spaces. The anterior primary ramus 
of the 12th thoracic spinal nerve runs in the abdominal wall 
below the 12th rib, hence it is called subcostal nerve.
N.B. Unique features: The intercostal nerves are anterior 
primary rami of thoracic spinal nerves. They are segmental 
in character unlike the anterior primary rami from other 
regions of spinal cord which form nerve plexuses viz. 
cervical, brachial, lumbar and sacral.
Classification
The intercostal nerves are classified into the following two 
groups:
1. Typical intercostal nerves (3rd, 4th, 5th, and 6th).
2. Atypical intercostal nerves (1st, 2nd, 7th, 8th, 9th, 10th, 
and 11th).
The typical intercostal nerves are those which remain 
confined to their own intercostal spaces.
The atypical spinal nerves extend beyond the thoracic 
wall and partly or entirely supply the other regions.
TYPICAL INTERCOSTAL NERVE
Course and Relations
The typical intercostal nerve after its origin turns laterally 
behind the sympathetic trunk, and then enters the intercostal 
space between the parietal pleura and posterior intercostal 
Posterior
root
Posterior/
dorsal root
ganglion
Posterior
primary
ramus
Anterior
primary ramus
(Intercostal 
nerve) 
Lateral
cutaneous
branch
Anterior
cutaneous branch
Anterior root
Spinal
cord
Nerve trunk
Sympathetic
ganglion
Fig. 16.5 Typical thoracic spinal nerve (GR = grey rami 
communicantes, WR = white rami communicantes).
--- Page 232 ---
Thoracic Wall and Mechanism of Respiration
membrane. It then enters the costal groove of the 
corresponding rib to course laterally and forwards.
In costal groove it comes into relation with corresponding 
intercostal vessels and forms neurovascular bundle of the 
intercostal space.
In the intercostal space, vein, artery and nerve lie in that 
order from above downwards.
Near the sternal end of the intercostal space, the intercostal 
nerve crosses in front of the internal thoracic artery. Then it 
pierces internal intercostal muscle, anterior intercostal 
membrane, and pectoralis major muscle to terminate as 
anterior cutaneous nerve.
N.B.
• In the posterior part of intercostal space, the intercostal 
nerve lies between the pleura and posterior intercostal 
membrane.
• In the remaining greater part of intercostal space, it lies 
between the internal intercostal and intercostalis intimus 
muscles.
Branches
1. Rami communicantes: Each nerve communicates with 
the corresponding thoracic ganglion by white and grey 
rami communicantes.
2. Muscular branches: These are small tender branches 
from the nerve, which supply intercostal muscles and 
serratus posterior and superior.
3. Collateral branch: It arises in the posterior part of the 
intercostal space near the angle of the rib and runs in the 
lower part of the space along the upper border of the rib 
below in the same neurovascular plane. It supplies 
intercostal muscles, parietal pleura, and periosteum of 
the rib.
4. Lateral cutaneous branch: It arises in the posterior 
part of the intercostal space near the angle of the rib 
and accompanies the main nerve for some distance, 
then pierces the muscles of the lateral thoracic wall 
along the midaxillary line. It divides into anterior and 
posterior branches to supply the skin on the lateral 
thoracic wall.
5. Anterior cutaneous branch: It is the terminal branch of 
the nerve, which emerges on the side of the sternum. It 
divides into medial and lateral branches and supplies the 
skin on the front of the thoracic wall.
ATYPICAL INTERCOSTAL NERVES
The atypical intercostal nerves are as follows:
1. First intercostal nerve: The greater part of this nerve 
joins the ventral ramus C8 spinal nerve to form lower 
trunk of the brachial plexus. The remaining part of the 
nerve is very small and it lacks both lateral and anterior 
cutaneous branches.
2. Second intercostal nerve: Its lateral cutaneous branch is 
called intercostobrachial nerve. It courses across the 
axilla and joins the medial cutaneous branch of the arm. 
The intercostobrachial nerve supplies the skin of the 
floor of the axilla and upper part of the medial side of 
the arm. In coronary arterial disease, the cardiac pain is 
referred along this nerve to the medial side of the arm.
3. Seventh to eleventh intercostal nerves: These nerves 
leave the corresponding intercostal spaces to enter into 
the abdominal wall; hence they are called thoraco-
abdominal nerves. These nerves supply intercostal 
muscles of the corresponding intercostal spaces. In 
addition they supply:
(a) muscles of anterior abdominal wall, e.g., external 
oblique, internal oblique, transverse abdominis, and 
rectus abdominis muscles, and
(b) skin and parietal peritoneum covering the outer and 
inner surfaces of the abdominal wall, respectively.
• Root pain/girdle pain: Irritation of intercostal nerves 
caused by the diseases of thoracic vertebrae produces 
severe pain which is referred around the trunk along the 
cutaneous distribution of the affected nerve. It is termed 
root pain or girdle pain.
• Sites of eruption of cold abscess on the body wall: Pus 
from the tuberculous thoracic vertebra/vertebrae (Pott’s 
disease) tends to track along the neurovascular plane of 
the space and may point at three sites of emergence of 
cutaneous branches of the thoracic spinal nerve, viz. 
(a) just lateral to the sternum, (b) in the midaxillary line, and 
(c) lateral to the erector spinae muscle (Fig. 16.6). 
• Herpes zoster: In herpes zoster (shingles) involving the 
thoracic spinal ganglia, the cutaneous vesicles appear in 
the dermatomal area of distribution of intercostal nerve. It 
is an extremely painful condition.
• Intercostal nerve block is given to produce local 
anesthesia in one or more intercostal spaces by injecting 
the anesthetic agent around the nerve trunk near its 
origin, i.e., just lateral to the vertebra.
• Thoracotomy: The conventional thoracotomy (postero- 
lateral) is performed along the 6th rib. The neurovascular 
bundle is protected from injury by lifting the periosteum of 
the rib.
• Considering the position of neurovascular bundle in the 
intercostal space, it is safe to insert the needle, a little 
above the upper border of the rib below.
Clinical correlation
INTERCOSTAL ARTERIES
The thoracic wall has rich blood supply. It is provided by the 
posterior and anterior intercostal arteries.
--- Page 233 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
Fig. 16.6 Sites of eruption of tuberculous cold abscess on the body wall. (Source: Fig. 3.1, Page 104, Clinical and Surgical 
Anatomy, 2e, Vishram Singh. Copyright Elsevier 2007 All rights reserved.)
Posterior primary ramus
Lateral to erector
spinae
In the midaxillary line
Lateral
cutaneous
branch
Anterior cutaneous
branch
Lateral to sternum
Sternum
Transversus thoracis
Anterior primary ramus
Internal intercostal
External intercostal
Innermost
intercostal
Each intercostal space contains one posterior and two 
anterior intercostal arteries (upper and lower).
POSTERIOR INTERCOSTAL ARTERIES (Fig. 16.7)
There are 11 pairs of intercostal arteries, one in each space. 
They supply the greater part of the intercostal spaces.
Origin
1. The 1st and 2nd posterior intercostal arteries are the 
branches of superior intercostal artery—a branch of the 
costocervical trunk.
2. The 3rd–11th posterior intercostal arteries arise directly 
from the descending thoracic aorta (Fig. 16.7A).
Course and Relations 
In front of the vertebral column (Fig. 16.7B)
 
 The right posterior intercostal arteries are longer than 
the left because the descending aorta lies on the left side 
of the front of the vertebral column. They pass behind 
the esophagus, thoracic duct, azygos vein, and 
sympathetic chain but in front of the anterior aspect of 
vertebral body.
 
 The left posterior intercostal arteries are smaller and pass 
behind the hemiazygos vein and sympathetic chain, but in 
front of the side of the vertebral body
In the intercostal space
In the intercostal space, the posterior intercostal artery lies 
between the intercostal vein above and the intercostal nerve 
below. The neurovascular bundle in the intercostal space lies 
between the internal intercostal and intercostalis intimus 
muscles.
Termination
Each posterior intercostal artery ends at the level of 
costochondral junction by anastomosing with the upper 
anterior intercostal artery of the space.
Branches
1. Dorsal branch: It supplies the spinal cord, vertebra and 
muscles, and skin of the back.
2. Collateral branch: It arises near the angle of the rib and 
runs forwards along the upper border of the rib below 
and ends by anastomosing with the lower anterior 
intercostal artery.
3. Muscular branches: They supply intercostal, pectoral, 
and serratus anterior muscles.
4. Lateral cutaneous branch: It closely follows the lateral 
cutaneous branch of the intercostal nerve.
5. Mammary branches (external mammary arteries): 
They arise from posterior intercostals arteries of the 
2nd, 3rd, and 4th intercostal spaces and supply the breast 
mammary gland.
6. Right bronchial artery: It arises from right 3rd posterior 
intercostal artery.
• Paracentesis thoracis: During paracentesis thoracis 
(aspiration of fluid from pleural cavity), the needle should 
never be inserted medial to the angle of the rib to avoid 
injury to the posterior intercostal artery, as it crosses the 
space obliquely from below upwards (for details see page 
216).
• Coarctation of aorta: In coarctation of aorta (narrowing 
of arch of aorta), the posterior intercostal arteries are 
markedly enlarged and cause notching of the ribs, 
particularly in their posterior parts.
Clinical correlation
--- Page 234 ---
Thoracic Wall and Mechanism of Respiration
Diaphragm
INTERCOSTAL ARTERIES
INTERCOSTAL ARTERIES
Right subclavian artery
Costocervical trunk
Deep cervical artery 
Costocervical trunk
Left subclavian artery 
Superior intercostal 
arteries 
Subcostal
artery
Subcostal
artery
Left posterior
intercostal artery
Dorsal branch
Lateral
cutaneous branch
Internal thoracic artery
Sternum 
Collateral branch 
Right posterior
intercostal artery
Anterior intercostal
arteries
Esophagus
Thoracic 
aorta 
Fig. 16.7 Posterior intercostal arteries: A, origin; B, course and relations (SC = sympathetic chain, AV = azygos vein, TD = 
thoracic duct, HAV = hemiazygos vein).
--- Page 235 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
ANTERIOR INTERCOSTAL ARTERIES
There are two intercostal arteries in each intercostal space. 
They are present in the upper nine intercostal spaces only.
Origin
1. In 1st–6th spaces they arise from the internal thoracic 
artery.
2. In 7th and 9th spaces, they arise from musculophrenic 
artery.
N.B. The 10th and 11th intercostal spaces do not extend 
forward enough to have anterior intercostal arteries.
Termination
The anterior intercostal arteries are short and end at the level 
of costochondral junction as follows:
1. Upper anterior intercostal artery anastomoses with 
corresponding posterior intercostal artery.
2. Lower anterior intercostal artery anastomoses with 
collateral branch of the corresponding posterior 
intercostal artery.
INTERCOSTAL VEINS
The number of intercostal vein corresponds to the number 
of intercostal arteries, i.e., each intercostal space contains 
two anterior intercostal veins and one posterior intercostal 
vein. Their tributaries correspond to the branches of the 
arteries.
ANTERIOR INTERCOSTAL VEINS
1. They are present only in the upper nine spaces.
2. Each space contains two veins and accompanies the 
anterior intercostal arteries.
Termination
1. In upper six spaces, they end in the internal thoracic 
vein.
2. In seventh, eighth, and ninth spaces, they end in the 
musculophrenic vein.
POSTERIOR INTERCOSTAL VEINS
1. They are present in all the spaces.
2. Each space contains only one posterior intercostal vein.
3. Each vein accompanies the posterior intercostal artery.
4. Its tributaries correspond to the branches of posterior 
intercostal artery.
Termination (Fig. 16.8)
The mode of drainage (termination) of posterior intercostal 
veins differs on the right and left sides (Table 16.2).
INTERCOSTAL LYMPH VESSELS AND
LYMPH NODES
LYMPH VESSELS
1. The lymph vessels from the anterior parts of the spaces 
drain into anterior intercostal/internal mammary lymph 
nodes. The efferent from these nodes unite with those of 
tracheobronchial and brachiocephalic nodes to form the 
bronchomediastinal trunk, which drains into subclavian 
trunk on the right side and thoracic duct on the left side.
2. The lymph vessels from the posterior parts of the spaces 
drain into posterior intercostal nodes. The efferent from 
the posterior intercostal nodes of lower four spaces unite 
to form a slender lymph trunk, which descends and 
drain into the cysterna chyli. The efferent from posterior 
intercostal nodes of upper spaces drain into right 
lymphatic duct on the right side and thoracic duct on 
the left side.
LYMPH NODES
1. Posterior intercostal nodes.
2. Anterior intercostal/internal mammary (parasternal) 
nodes.
The posterior intercostal nodes are located in the posterior 
part of the intercostal spaces on the necks of the ribs.
The anterior intercostal nodes lie along the course of 
internal thoracic (mammary) artery.
INTERNAL THORACIC ARTERY (Fig. 16.9)
There are two internal thoracic arteries, right and left, 
situated deep to anterior chest wall, one on either side of 
sternum.
Origin
The internal thoracic artery arises from the first part of the 
subclavian artery (lower surface), about 2.5 cm above the 
medial end of the clavicle, opposite the origin of the 
thyrocervical trunk.
Course and Termination
The internal thoracic artery descends behind the medial end 
of the clavicle and upper six coastal cartilages, about 1 cm 
away from the lateral margin of the sternum. It ends in the 
6th intercostal space by dividing into superior epigastric and 
musculophrenic arteries.
--- Page 236 ---
Thoracic Wall and Mechanism of Respiration
Left brachiocephalic vein 
Superior
vena cava
Right superior
intercostal vein
Azygos vein
Left superior intercostal vein 
Accessory hemiazygos vein
Hemiazygos vein
Subcostal vein
Subcostal vein
Left ascending lumbar vein 
Left renal vein 
Right renal vein 
Right ascending lumbar vein
Fig. 16.8 Drainage of posterior intercostal veins. Note that posterior intercostal veins are numbered 1–11 from above 
downwards.
Table 16.2 Mode of termination of right and left posterior intercostal veins
Right posterior intercostal veins
Left posterior intercostal veins
1st (highest) drains into the right brachiocephalic vein
1st (highest) drains into left brachiocephalic vein
2nd, 3rd, and 4th join to form right superior intercostal 
vein, which in turn drains into the azygos vein
2nd, 3rd, and 4th join to form left superior intercostal vein, which 
in turn drains into left brachiocephalic vein
5th–11th drain into the azygos vein
• 5th–8th drain into accessory azygos vein
• 9th–11th drain into hemiazygos vein
Subcostal vein drains into the azygos vein
Subcostal vein drains into the hemiazygos vein
Relations
Anteriorly: From above downwards, it is related to:
 
 Medial end of the clavicle.
 
 Internal jugular vein.
 
 Brachiocephalic vein.
 
 Phrenic nerve.
 
 Pectoralis major.
 
 Upper six costal cartilages.
 
 External intercostal membranes.
 
 Internal intercostal muscles.
 
 Upper six intercostal nerves.
--- Page 237 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
Posteriorly:
 
 Above the 2nd costal cartilage, it is related to 
endothoracic fascia and pleura.
 
 Below the 2nd costal cartilage, it is related to 
sternocostalis muscle, which intervenes between 
the artery and the endothoracic fascia and pleura.
N.B. The internal mammary artery is accompanied by two 
venae comitantes, which unite at the level of 3rd costal 
cartilage to form the internal thoracic (mammary) vein, which 
runs upwards along the medial side of the artery to terminate 
into the brachiocephalic vein at the root of the neck.
Branches
1. Pericardiophrenic artery: It arises in the root of the neck 
above the 1st costal cartilage, and descends along with 
phrenic nerve to the diaphragm. It supplies pericardium 
and pleura.
2. Mediastinal branches: They are small inconstant twigs, 
which supply connective tissue, thymus, and front of the 
pericardium.
3. Anterior intercostal arteries: They are two for each of 
the upper six intercostal spaces.
4. Perforating branches: They accompany the anterior 
cutaneous branches of intercostal nerves. In females, the 
perforating branches of 2nd, 3rd, and 4th intercostal 
spaces are quite large and supply the breast.
5. Superior epigastric artery: It runs downwards behind 
the 7th costal cartilage between the sternal and 1st costal 
slips of diaphragm to enter the rectus sheath where it 
ends by anastomosing with the inferior epigastric artery. 
It supplies anterior body wall from clavicle to the 
umbilicus.
6. Musculophrenic artery: It runs downwards and 
laterally behind the 7th, 8th, and 9th costal cartilages, 
and gives two anterior intercostal arteries to each of the 
7th, 8th, and 9th intercostal spaces. It pierces the 
diaphragm near the 9th costal cartilage, to reach under 
surface. It supplies diaphragm and muscles of the 
anterior abdominal wall.
Role of internal mammary artery in treatment of 
coronary heart diseases:
• The internal thoracic artery is sometimes used to treat 
coronary heart disease. When the segment of coronary 
artery is blocked by atherosclerosis, (mostly), the diseased 
arterial segment is bypassed by inserting a graft. The graft 
most commonly used is taken from great saphenous vein 
of the leg. In some patients, the myocardium is 
revascularized by mobilizing the internal thoracic artery 
and joining its distal cut end to the coronary artery distal to 
the diseased segment.
The internal mammary artery graft (IMA graft) is 
preferred over grafts from other vessels, because IMA 
graft lasts long. Recently it has been found that internal 
mammary 
arteries 
less 
prone 
develop 
atherosclerosis because of their histological peculiarity. 
The walls of these arteries contain only elastic tissue and 
the cells of their endothelial lining secrete some chemicals, 
which prevents atherosclerosis. The left internal mammary 
artery is preferred over right internal mammary artery, 
because it is easier to access it.
• Earlier the internal thoracic artery was used to be ligated 
in the 3rd intercostal space in order to reinforce the blood 
supply to the heart by diverting blood from this artery to 
its pericardiophrenic branch. This procedure is now 
obsolete.
Clinical correlation
MECHANISM OF RESPIRATION
The respiration consists of two alternate phases of 
(a) inspiration and (b) expiration, which are associated 
with alternate increase and decrease in the volume of 
thoracic cavity, respectively. During inspiration, the air is 
taken in (inhaled) and during expiration, the air is taken 
out (exhaled).
Scalenus
anterior muscle
Internal
thoracic artery
Superior epigastric artery
6th ICS 
Musculophrenic artery
Thyrocervical trunk
Vertebral artery
Subclavian artery
Fig. 16.9 Origin, course, and termination of internal thoracic 
artery (ICS = intercostal space).
--- Page 239 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
Fig. 16.13 Increase in transverse diameter of the thoracic cavity due to bucket-handle movements of vertebrochondral rib: 
A, idealized representation; B, actual movements of the ribs.
the ribs move outwards like the bucket handle—bucket 
handle movement. This causes increase in the transverse 
diameter of the thoracic cavity (Fig. 16.13). The axis of 
movement passes from the tubercle of this rib to the middle 
of the sternum.
bucket-handle 
movement 
produced 
vertebrochondral ribs.
The main factors responsible for increase in various 
diameters of the thoracic cavity are summarized in Table 
16.3.
Table 16.3 Factors responsible for the increase in various 
diameters of the thoracic cavity during inspiration
Diameter
Factors responsible for increase
Vertical
Descent (contraction) of the diaphragm
Anteroposterior
Pump-handle movement of the sternum 
(brought about by the elevation of 
vertebrosternal ribs)
Transverse
Bucket-handle movement of the 
vertebrochondral ribs
Table 16.4 Muscles acting during different types of respiration
Type of respiration
Inspiration (elevation of ribs)
Expiration (depression of ribs)
Quiet respiration
• External intercostal muscles
• Diaphragm
• Passive
• No muscles
Deep respiration
• External intercostal muscles
• Scalene muscles
• Sternocleidomastoid
• Levatores costarum
• Serratus posterior superior
• Diaphragm
• Passive
• No muscles
Forced respiration
• All the muscles involved in deep inspiration 
(vide supra)
• Levator scapulae
• Trapezius
• Rhomboids
• Pectoral muscles
• Serratus anterior
• Quadratus lumborum
• Internal intercostal muscles
• Transverse thoracis
• Serratus posterior inferior
--- Page 240 ---
Thoracic Wall and Mechanism of Respiration
EXPIRATION
The expiration is the passive process brought about by
(a) elastic recoil of the alveoli of the lungs,
(b) relaxation of the intercostal muscles and the diaphragm, 
(c) increase in the tone of the muscles of anterior abdominal 
wall.
TYPES OF RESPIRATION (BREATHING)
The respiration is classified into the following three types:
1. Quiet respiration.
2. Deep respiration.
3. Forced respiration.
In quiet respiration, the movements are normal as 
described above.
In deep respiration, movements described for quiet 
respiration are increased. The 1st rib is elevated by scalene 
and sternocleidomastoid muscles.
In forced respiration, all movements are exaggerated. 
The scapula is fixed and elevated by trapezius, levator 
scapulae, rhomboideus major, and rhomboideus minor 
muscles, so that pectoral muscles and serratus anterior 
can raise the ribs.
The muscles acting during different types of 
respiration (i.e., respiratory muscles) are enumerated in 
Table 16.4.
Posture of patient during asthmatic attack: During 
asthmatic attack (characterized by breathlessness/
difficulty in breathing), the patient is most comfortable on 
sitting up, leaning forwards and fixing the arms on the 
bed/table. This is because in the sitting position, the 
diaphragm is at its lowest level, allowing maximum 
ventilation. Fixation of arms fixes the scapulae, so that 
the pectoral muscles and serratus anterior may act on the 
ribs which they elevate.
Clinical correlation
--- Page 242 ---
Pleural Cavities
CHAPTER
The thoracic cavity is divided into three compartments (Fig. 
17.1): right and left lateral compartments and middle 
compartment. Each lateral compartment is occupied by a 
lung enclosed in the serous sac called pleural cavity. The 
middle compartment contains, essentially, all the thoracic 
structures except lungs, such as heart with its pericardium, 
great blood vessels that leave or enter the heart, structures 
that traverse the thorax to enter the abdomen in passing from 
the neck to the abdomen or from abdomen to neck such as 
esophagus, vagus nerves, phrenic nerves, and thoracic duct.
The mass of tissues and organs occupying the middle 
compartment form a mobile septum—mediastinum that 
completely separates the two pleural cavities.
PLEURAL CAVITIES (Fig. 17.2)
Each lung is invested by and enclosed in a serous sac which 
consists of two continuous serous membranes—the visceral 
pleura and parietal pleura. The visceral pleura invests all the 
surfaces of the lung forming its shiny outer surface, whereas 
the parietal pleura lines the pulmonary cavity (i.e., thoracic 
wall and mediastinum).
The space between the visceral and parietal pleura is 
called pleural cavity.
A little description of development of lung makes it is 
easier to understand the relationship of the lung and pleura.
During early embryonic life, each lateral compartment of 
the thoracic cavity is occupied by a closed serous sac, which 
is invaginated from the medial side by the developing lung 
and as a result of this invagination, it converted into a 
double-layered sac. The outer layer is called parietal pleura 
and the inner layer is called visceral pleura. The visceral 
pleura is continuous with parietal pleura at the root of the 
lung. The parietal and visceral layers are separated from each 
other by a slit-like potential space called pleural cavity. The 
pleural cavity is normally filled with a thin film of tissue 
fluid, which lubricates the adjoining surfaces of the pleura 
and allows them to move on each other without friction.
The two layers become continuous with each other by 
means of a cuff of pleura, which surrounds the root of the 
lung consisting of structures entering and leaving the lung at 
the hilum of the lung, such as principal bronchi and 
Mediastinum
Thoracic wall
Lung
Lung
Root of lung
Parietal pleura
Visceral pleura
Pleural cavity
Left lateral compartment
(left pleural/pulmonary cavity)
Middle compartment
Right lateral compartment
(right pleural/pulmonary cavity)
Fig. 17.1 Compartment of the thoracic cavity: A, empty 
compartments; B, lateral compartments occupied by lung 
enclosed in the serous sac (pleural sac).
--- Page 243 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
root of the lung as far down as the diaphragm between the 
lung and the mediastinum.
PLEURA
The pleura-like peritoneum is a serous membrane lined by 
flattened epithelium (mesothelium). The lining epithelium 
secretes a watery lubricant—the serous fluid.
LAYERS OF THE PLEURA
The pleura consist of two layers: (a) visceral pleura and 
(b) parietal pleura. The moistened space between the two 
layers is called pleural cavity (vide supra).
Visceral Pleura (Pulmonary Pleura)
The visceral pleura completely covers the surface of the lung 
except at the hilum and along the attachment of the 
pulmonary ligament. It also extends into the depths of the 
fissures of the lungs. It is firmly adherent to the lung surface 
and cannot be separated from it.
Parietal Pleura
The parietal pleura is thicker than the visceral pleura and 
lines the walls of the pulmonary cavity.
Subdivisions
For the purpose of description, it is customary to divide 
parietal pleura, according to the surface, which it lines, covers 
or the region in which it lies. Thus parietal pleura is divided 
into the following four parts (Fig. 17.3):
1. Costal pleura.
2. Diaphragmatic pleura.
3. Mediastinal pleura.
4. Cervical pleura.
Costal pleura: It lines the inner surface of the thoracic wall 
(consisting of ribs, costal cartilages, and intercostal spaces) 
to which it is loosely attached by a thin layer of loose areolar 
tissue called endothoracic fascia. In living beings, 
endothoracic fascia is easily separable from the thoracic wall.
Diaphragmatic pleura: It covers the superior surface of the 
diaphragm. In quiet respiration, the costal and diaphragmatic 
pleura are in opposition to each other below the inferior 
border of the lung.
Mediastinal pleura: It lines the corresponding surface of the 
mediastinum and forms its lateral boundary. It is reflected as 
a cuff over the root of the lung and becomes continuous with 
the visceral pleura.
Cervical pleura: It is the dome of parietal pleura, which 
extends into the root of the neck about 1 inch (2.5 cm) above 
the medial end of clavicle and 2 inches (5 cm) above the 1st 
Laryngotracheal
tube
Lung bud 
Pleural sac
Parietal pleura
Visceral pleura 
Root of lung
Parietal pleura
Pleural cavity
Visceral pleura
LUNG
LUNG
Fig. 17.2 Invagination of developing lungs into the closed 
serous sacs.
pulmonary vessels. To allow the movement of principal 
bronchi and pulmonary vessels during respiration, the cuff 
of pleura hangs down as loose triangular fold called 
pulmonary ligament. The pulmonary ligament extends from
--- Page 245 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
SURFACE MARKINGS OF THE PLEURA (Fig. 17.5)
The knowledge of reflexion of parietal pleura on the surface 
of the chest wall is of great importance while carrying out 
various medical and surgical procedures.
The reflection of parietal pleura can be marked on the 
surface by the following lines:
1. Cervical pleura: It is marked by a curved line (with 
convexity directed upwards) drawn from sternoclavicular 
joint to the junction of medial third and middle third of 
the clavicle. The summit of dome of pleura lies 1 inch 
(2.5) above the medial one-third of the clavicle.
2. Anterior (costomediastinal) line of pleural reflection: It 
differs on the two sides:
(a) On the right side, it extends downwards and 
medially from the right sternoclavicular joint to the 
midpoint of the sternal angle, and then descends 
vertically up to the midpoint of the xiphisternal 
joint.
(b) On the left side, it extends downwards and medially 
from the left sternoclavicular joint to the midpoint 
of the sternal angle, then descends vertically only up 
to the level of the 4th costal cartilage. It then arches 
2.5 cm above the medial
3rd of the clavicle
Sternoclavicular joint
Junction of medial and middle
3rd of the clavicle
Midpoint of sternal angle
6th costal cartilage
8th rib in the midclavicular line
10th rib in the midaxillary line
Posterior end 2 cm from midline
at the level of T12 spine 
12th rib at the lateral border
of erector spinae muscle
Midpoint of 
xiphisternal angle 
8th rib in the
midclavicular line
10th rib in the 
midaxillary line 
Level of 4th costal cartilage
Fig. 17.5 Schematic diagram showing lines of pleural reflection.
outwards to reach the sternal margin of sternum 
and runs downwards a short distance lateral to this 
margin to reach the 6th costal cartilage, about 3 cm 
from the midline leaving a part of pericardium 
directly in contact with anterior chest wall (bare 
area of the heart).
3. Inferior (costodiaphragmatic) line of pleural reflection: 
It passes laterally around the chest wall from the lower 
limit of the anterior line of pleural reflection. It differs 
slightly on two sides:
(a) On the right side, the line of reflection starts from 
the xiphisternal joint or behind the xiphoid process 
and crosses the 8th rib in the midclavicular line, 
10th rib in the midaxillary line, and 12th rib at the 
lateral border of the erector spinae muscle, 2 cm 
lateral to the spine of T12 vertebra.
(b) On the left side, the line of reflection starts at the 
level of the 6th costal cartilage, about 2 cm lateral to 
the midline. Thereafter it follows the same course as 
on the right side.
4. Posterior (costovertebral) line of pleural reflection: It 
ascends from the end of the inferior line, 2 cm lateral to 
the T12 spine along the vertebral column to the point,
--- Page 246 ---
Pleural Cavities
2 cm lateral to the spine of C7 vertebra. The costal pleura 
becomes mediastinal pleura along this line.
N.B. The inferior margin of the lung passes more horizontally 
than the inferior margin of the pleura. Consequently, it 
crosses the 6th rib in the midclavicular line, 8th rib in the 
midaxillary line, and 10th rib at the lateral border of the 
erector spine.
The ribs crossed by inferior margin of the lung and pleura 
in midclavicular line, midaxillary line, and lateral to erector 
spine are compared below:
Inferior margin of lung: 6th rib, 8th rib, and 10th rib
Inferior margin of pleura: 8th rib, 10th rib, and 12th rib
RECESSES OF THE PLEURA (Fig. 17.3)
Normally the space between the parietal and visceral pleura 
is only a potential space and is filled with thin film of serous 
fluid. However in areas of pleural reflection on to the 
diaphragm and mediastinum, the space between the parietal 
and visceral pleura is greatly expanded. These expanded 
regions of pleural cavity are called pleural recesses. They are 
essential for lung expansion during deep inspiration. Thus 
pleural recesses serve as reserve spaces of pleural cavity for the 
lungs to expand during deep inspiration. The recesses of 
pleura are as follows:
1. Costodiaphragmatic recesses (right and left).
2. Costomediastinal recesses (right and left).
N.B. In addition to the above recesses of pleura, there are 
three more small recesses, viz.
• Right and left retroesophageal recesses
 
These are formed by the reflection of mediastinal pleura 
behind the esophagus. Each recess is thought to be 
occupied by a part of the lung, and contributes to the 
retrocardiac space seen in the radiographs of the chest.
• Infracardiac recess
 
It is a small recess of right pleural sac which sometimes 
extends beneath the inferior vena cava.
Costodiaphragmatic recess (Fig. 17.3A): It is located 
inferiorly between the costal and diaphragmatic pleurae. 
Vertically it measures about 5 cm and lies opposite the 
8th–10th 
ribs 
along 
midaxillary 
line. 
costodiaphragmatic recesses are the most dependent parts of 
the pleural cavities, hence the fluid of pleural effusion first 
collect at these sites.
Costomediastinal recess (Fig. 17.3B): It is located anteriorly 
between the costal and mediastinal pleurae and lies between 
sternum and costal cartilages. The right costomediastinal 
recess is possibly occupied by the anterior margin of the 
right lung even during quiet breathing. The left 
costomediastinal recess is large due to the presence of cardiac 
notch in the left lung. Its location can be confirmed clinically 
by percussion (tapping) of the chest wall. As one moves 
during tapping from the area of underlying lung tissue to the 
area of left costomediastinal recess unoccupied by lung 
tissue, a change in tone, from resonant to dull, is noticed. 
This is called the area of superficial cardiac dullness.
• Radiological appearance of pleural effusion: When a 
small quantity of fluid collects in the costodiaphragmatic 
recess (pleural effusion) the costodiaphragmatic angle is 
obliterated (widening of the angle). It is seen as 
radiopaque shadow with a fluid line in X-ray chest. This 
may be the first indication of pleural effusion. Therefore 
recesses of pleura are examined routinely in the chest 
radiographs.
The costodiaphragmatic recess can be entered through 
the 9th and 10th intercostal spaces without penetrating 
the lung in patient with quiet breathing because it lies 
opposite 8th–10th ribs.
• Sites of extension of pleura beyond the thoracic cage: 
There are five sites, where pleura extends beyond the 
thoracic cage.
These sites are as follows:
1. On either side in the root of the neck (as domes of 
pleura).
2. In the right xiphisternal angle.
3. On either side in the costovertebral angle.
The pleura can be punctured inadvertently at these sites 
during surgical procedures.
Clinical correlation
NERVE SUPPLY OF THE PLEURA
The parietal pleura develops from somatopleuric layer of the 
lateral plate of mesoderm, hence it is supplied by the somatic 
nerves and is sensitive to pain:
 
 Costal and peripheral part of the diaphragmatic pleura is 
supplied by the intercostal nerves.
 
 Mediastinal and central part of the diaphragmatic pleura 
is supplied by the phrenic nerve.
The visceral pleura develops from splanchnopleuric layer 
of the lateral plate of mesoderm, hence it is supplied by the 
autonomic (sympathetic) nerves (T2–T5) and is insensitive 
to pain.
Referred pain of pleura: The pain from central 
diaphragmatic pleura and mediastinal pleura is referred to 
the neck or shoulder through phrenic nerves (C3, C4, and 
C5) because skin at these sites has same segmental supply 
through the supraclavicular nerves (C3, C4, and C5).
Clinical correlation
--- Page 247 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
BLOOD SUPPLY AND LYMPHATIC
DRAINAGE OF THE PLEURA
Blood supply of parietal pleura is same as that of the 
thoracic wall and blood supply of the visceral (pulmonary) 
pleura is same as that of the lung.
Table 17.1 enumerates the differences between parietal 
and visceral pleura.
• Pleurisy or pleuritis: It is the inflammation of the parietal 
pleura. Clinically it presents as pain, which is aggravated 
by respiratory movements and radiates to thoracic and 
abdominal walls. It is commonly caused by pulmonary 
tuberculosis. The pleural surface becomes rough due to 
accumulation of inflammatory exudate. Due to roughening 
of the pleural surfaces friction occurs between the two 
layers of pleura during respiratory movements. Thus 
pleural rub can be heard with stethoscope on the surface 
of the chest wall during inspiration and expiration.
• The collection of serous fluid, air, blood, and pus in the 
pleural cavity is termed hydrothorax (pleural effusion) 
pneumothorax, hemothorax, and pyothorax (empyema), 
respectively.
• Pleural effusion (Fig. 17.6): Normally the pleural cavity 
contains only 5–10 ml of clear fluid, which lubricates the 
pleural surfaces to allow their smooth movements without 
friction. The excessive accumulation of fluid in the pleural 
cavity is called pleural effusion. It usually occurs due to 
inflammation of pleura. The pleural effusion leads to 
decreased expansion of lung on the side of effusion. 
Clinically it can be detected with decreased breath sounds 
and dullness on percussion on the site of effusion.
• Thoracocentesis/pleural tab: It is a procedure by which 
an excess fluid is aspirated from the pleural cavity. It is 
performed with the patient in sitting position. Usually the 
needle is inserted in the 6th intercostal space in the 
midaxillary line. The needle is inserted into the lower part 
of the intercostal space along the upper border of the rib 
to avoid injury to the intercostal nerve and vessels. The 
needle passes in succession through skin, superficial 
fascia, serratus anterior, intercostal muscles, endothoracic 
fascia, and parietal pleura to reach the pleural cavity.
• Pneumothorax (Fig. 17.7): Accumulation of air in the 
pleural cavity is called pneumothorax.
– Spontaneous pneumothorax: As the name indicates, in 
this condition, air enters pleural cavity suddenly due the 
rupture of emphysematous bullae of the lung.
– Open pneumothorax: This condition occurs due to stab 
wounds on the thoracic wall piercing the pleurae, 
leading to the communication of air in the pleural cavity 
with the outside (atmospheric) air. Consequently, each 
time when patient inspires, the air is sucked into the 
pleural cavity. Sometimes the clothing and the layers of 
thoracic wall combine to form a valve so that air enters 
through the wound during inspiration, but cannot exit 
through it. In these circumstances, air pressure builds 
up continuously in the pleural cavity on the wounded 
side which pushes the mediastinum to the opposite
Clinical correlation
 (healthy) side. This is called tension pneumothorax. The 
tension pneumothorax is characterized by (a) collapse 
of lung on the affected side, and (b) compression of 
lung on the healthy side.
Atmospheric air
Accumulation
of air in the
pleural cavity 
Partially
collapsed lung
Fig. 17.7 Pneumothorax.
Diminished
breath sounds
Serous fluid
Fig. 17.6 Pleural effusion.
Table 17.1 Differences between the parietal and visceral 
pleurae
Parietal pleura
Visceral pleura
Lines the thoracic wall and 
mediastinum
Lines the surface of the lung
Develops from the 
somatopleuric mesoderm
Develops from the 
splanchnopleuric mesoderm
Innervated by the somatic 
nerves
Innervated by the autonomic 
nerves
Sensitive to pain
Insensitive to pain
Blood supply and 
lymphatic drainage is same 
as that of thoracic wall
Blood supply and lymphatic 
drainage is same as that of the 
lung
--- Page 249 ---
Lungs (Pulmones)
CHAPTER
LUNGS (PULMONES)
The lungs or pulmones are the principal organs of 
respiration. The two lungs (right and left) are situated in the 
thoracic cavity, one on either side of the mediastinum 
enclosed in the pleural sac. The main function of lungs is to 
oxygenate the blood, i.e., exchange of O2 and CO2 between 
inspired air and blood. Each lung is large conical/pyramidal 
shaped with its base resting on the diaphragm and its apex 
extending into the root of the neck. The right lung is larger 
and heavier than the left lung. The right lung weighs about 
700 g and left lung 650 g. The right lung has three lobes and 
the left lung has two lobes. The lobes are separated by deep 
prominent fissures on the surface of the lung and are 
supplied by two lobar bronchi (Fig. 18.1).
The lungs are attached to the trachea and heart by 
principal bronchi and pulmonary vessels, respectively.
In newborn baby and people living in clean environment, 
the lungs are rosy pink in color, but in people living in 
polluted areas or those who are smokers, have the lungs are 
brown or black in color, and mottled in appearance due to 
inhaled carbon particles.
In the adults, the lungs are spongy in texture and 
crepitate on touch due to the presence of air in their alveoli. 
They float in water. In fetus and stillborn children, the 
lungs are solid and do not crepitate on touch due to the 
absence of air in their alveoli. They sink in water.
EXTERNAL FEATURES
Each lung presents the following features (Figs 18.1 and 
18.2):
1. Apex.
2. Base.
Fig. 18.1 Trachea and lungs as seen from the front.
Trachea
Apex
Oblique fissure
Oblique fissure
Horizontal fissure
Lingula
Inferior border
Base
Cardiac notch
Posterior border
Anterior border
--- Page 250 ---
Lungs (Pulmones)
3. Three borders (anterior, posterior, and inferior).
4. Two surfaces (costal and medial).
Anatomical position and side determination
The side of lung can be determined by holding the lung in 
such a way that:
(a) its conical end (apex) is directed upwards and its broader 
end (base) is directed downwards,
(b) its convex surface (costal surface) is directed outwards 
and its flat medial surface presenting hilum is directed 
inwards,
(c) its thin margin (anterior margin) should face forwards 
and its rounded border (posterior border) should face 
backwards.
N.B. The side should not be determined by number of 
fissures and lobes as they are variable.
The external features are discussed in detail in the following 
text.
APEX
The apex is rounded/blunt superior end of the lung. It 
extends into the root of the neck about 3 cm superior to the 
anterior end of the 1st rib and 2.5 cm above the medial one-
third of the clavicle. It is covered by cervical pleura and 
suprapleural membrane.
Relations
Anterior: (a) Subclavian artery, (b) internal thoracic artery, 
and (c) scalenus anterior.
Posterior: Neck of 1st rib and structures in front of it, e.g., (a) 
ventral ramus of first thoracic nerve, (b) first 
posterior intercostal artery, (c) first posterior 
intercostal vein, and (d) sympathetic chain.
N.B.
• All the structures related to the apex are separated from 
it by suprapleural membrane.
• Apex is grooved by subclavian artery on the medial side 
and on the front.
Pancoast syndrome: It occurs due to involvement of 
structures related to the posterior aspect of the apex of lung 
by the cancer of the lung apex.
Clinical features
• Pain along the medial side of forearm and hand, and 
wasting of small muscles of the hand due to involvement 
of ventral ramus of T1.
• Horner’s syndrome, due to involvement of sympathetic 
chain.
• Erosion of first rib.
Clinical correlation
N.B. Cancer of lung apex may spread to involve neighboring 
structures, such as subclavian or brachiocephalic vein, 
subclavian artery, phrenic nerve causing following signs and 
symptoms.
• Venous engorgement and edema in neck, face, and arm 
due involvement of subclavian and brachiocephalic 
veins.
• Diminished brachial and/or radial pulse due to 
compression on subclavian artery.
• Paralysis of hemidiaphragm due to infiltration of phrenic 
nerve.
BASE
The base is lower semilunar concave surface, which rests on 
the dome of the diaphragm, hence it is also sometimes called 
diaphragmatic surface.
Fig. 18.2 Lobes of the lung with lobar bronchi.
Left superior
lobar bronchus
Costal surface
Oblique fissure
Lingula
Left inferior
lobar bronchus
Right upper
lobar bronchus
Oblique fissure
Horizontal fissure
Base
Apex
Cardiac notch
Medial surface
Right middle
lobar bronchus
Right inferior lobar
bronchus
--- Page 251 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
Relations
On the right side, the lung is separated from the liver by the 
right dome of the diaphragm, and on the left side, the left 
lung is separated from the spleen and fundus of stomach by 
the left dome of the diaphragm.
N.B. The base of the right lung is deeper (i.e., more 
concave) because right dome of diaphragm rises to the 
more superior level due to the presence of liver underneath 
BORDERS
The borders of the lungs are as follows:
1. Anterior border: It is thin and shorter than the posterior 
border. The anterior border of right lung is vertical. The 
anterior border of left lung presents a wide cardiac 
notch, which is occupied by the heart and pericardium. 
In this region, the heart and pericardium is uncovered 
by the lung. Hence this region is responsible for an area 
of superficial cardiac dullness. Below the cardiac notch, 
it presents a tongue-shaped projection called lingula.
2. Posterior border: It is thick and rounded. It extends 
from spine of C7 vertebra to the spine of T10 vertebra.
3. Inferior border: It is semilunar in shape and separates 
the costal and medial surfaces.
SURFACES
The surfaces of the lungs are costal and medial.
Costal Surface
It is large, smooth, and convex. It is covered by the costal 
pleura and endothoracic fascia.
Relations
It is related to the lateral thoracic wall. (In embalmed and 
hardened lung, the costal surface presents impressions of the 
ribs.)
The number of ribs related to this surface is as follows:
 
 Upper 6 ribs in midclavicular line.
 
 Upper 8 ribs in midaxillary line.
 
 Upper 10 ribs in scapular line.
Medial Surface
It is divided into two parts (a) small posterior vertebral part, 
and (b) large anterior mediastinal part.
Relations
The vertebral part is related to the vertebral column, 
posterior intercostal vessels, and greater and lesser splanchnic 
nerves.
The mediastinal part presents a hilum, and it is related to 
mediastinal structures such as heart, great blood vessels, and 
nerves. Since the right and left surfaces of mediastinum 
consists of different structures. The relations of the 
mediastinal surface of the two lungs differ because structures 
forming right and left surfaces of mediastinum differ. To 
understand the relations of the mediastinal surfaces of the 
lungs, the students are advised to know the structures 
forming the right and left surfaces of the mediastinum.
Structures 
forming 
right 
surface 
mediastinum 
(Fig. 19.3A):
1. The right mediastinal surface mainly consists of right 
atrium.
2. Above the right atrium are present superior vena cava 
and right brachiocephalic vein.
3. Behind these structures are present the trachea and 
esophagus.
4. The azygos vein, a large venous channel, runs upwards 
along the side of vertebral column and arches over the 
root of the right lung to terminate into the superior vena 
cava.
5. Three neural structures, viz. (a) right phrenic nerve, 
(b) right vagus nerve, and (c) right sympathetic chain.
 
 The phrenic nerve runs to diaphragm passing 
superficial to three venous structures from above 
downwards—(i) superior vena cava, (ii) right atrium, 
and (iii) inferior vena cava. This course is in front of 
the root of the lung.
The vagus nerve lies against the right side of the trachea 
and travels behind the lung root. Here it breaks up into 
branches to take part in the formation of posterior 
pulmonary plexus and esophageal plexus.
The sympathetic trunk runs in the paravertebral gutter. 
The splanchnic nerves leave its lower half, run medially, and 
pierce the crura of diaphragm to reach the abdomen.
Structures forming left surface of the mediastinum 
(Fig. 19.3B):
1. The left ventricle and aorta are the main structures 
forming the left surface of the mediastinum.
2. Aorta ascends at first, arches over the left lung root, and 
then descends behind the lung root.
3. Three greet vessels (brachiocephalic trunk, left common 
carotid artery, and left subclavian vein) arise from the 
aortic arch and ascend up to reach the root of the neck.
4. The esophagus as it descends through thorax shifts to 
the left behind the heart and gently crosses the line of 
the descending aorta.
5. Three neural structures, viz. (a) left phrenic nerve, 
(b) left vagus nerve, and (c) left sympathetic chain.
--- Page 252 ---
Lungs (Pulmones)
 The left phrenic nerve crosses the aortic (left) side, 
passes in front of the lung root, and runs down 
superficial to left ventricle to reach the diaphragm.
 
 The left vagus nerve is held away from the trachea by 
the aortic arch. Here it gives recurrent laryngeal 
branch, which hooks under the aortic arch, ascends 
up into the tracheoesophageal groove. Below the 
aortic arch, the vagus nerve runs behind the lung root 
and breaks up into posterior pulmonary and 
esophageal branches.
 
 The position of sympathetic trunk and splanchnic 
nerves is similar to those of the right side.
The relations of mediastinal surfaces of right and left 
lungs are given in Table 18.1 and shown in Figures 18.3 and 
18.4.
The impressions produced by mediastinal structures on 
the medial surfaces of lungs are shown in Figures 18.5 and 
18.6.
LOBES AND FISSURES (Figs 18.1 and 18.2)
The right lung is divided into three lobes: superior, middle, 
and inferior by two fissures—(a) an oblique fissure and (b) a 
horizontal fissure.
The left lung is divided into two lobes: (a) superior and 
(b) inferior by an oblique fissure.
1. Oblique fissure: A long oblique fissure runs obliquely 
downwards and forwards crossing the posterior border 
about 6 cm (2 inches) below the apex and inferior border 
about 7.5 cm (3 inches) lateral to the midline. It separates 
the superior and middle lobes from the inferior lobe.
2. Horizontal fissure: A short horizontal fissure is present 
only in the right lung. It starts from oblique fissure at the 
midaxillary line and runs horizontally forward to the 
anterior border of the lung. It separates the superior and 
middle lobes.
Fig. 18.3 Structures related to the mediastinal surface of 
the right lung.
Esophagus
Groove for right
subclavian artery
Right vagus
nerve
Trachea
Arch of 
azygos vein
Root of
right lung
Inferior
vena cava
Superior
vena cava
Right atrium
Right phrenic
nerve
Fig. 18.4 Structures related to the mediastinal surface of 
the left lung and producing impression on this surface.
Esophagus
Descending
thoracic aorta
Left recurrent
laryngeal nerve
Left subclavian
artery
Arch of aorta
Left common
carotid artery
Cardiac notch
Left ventricle
Left phrenic
nerve
Esophagus
Trachea
Thoracic
duct
Left vagus
Root of
left lung
Table 18.1 Relations of the mediastinal surfaces of the 
right and left lungs
Mediastinal surface of the 
right lung
Mediastinal surface of the left 
lung
Right atrium
Left ventricle
Superior and inferior vena 
cavae
Ascending aorta
Azygos vein
Arch of aorta and descending 
thoracic aorta
Right brachiocephalic vein
Left subclavian and left 
common carotid arteries
Esophagus and trachea
Esophagus and thoracic duct
Three neural structures
Four neural structures
• Right phrenic nerve
• Left phrenic vein
• Right vagus nerve
• Left vagus nerve
• Right sympathetic chain
• Left recurrent pharyngeal 
nerve
• Left sympathetic chain
--- Page 253 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
Fig. 18.5 The impressions produced by mediastinal structures on the medial surface of the right lung. (Source: 
Fig. 63.6, Page 1066, Gray’s Anatomy: The Anatomical Basis of Clinical Practice, 39th ed., Susan Standring (Editor-in-
Chief). Copyright Elsevier Ltd., 2005, All rights reserved.)
Oblique fissure 
Superior lobar bronchus
Right pulmonary artery
Right principal bronchus
Groove for esophagus
Lower right pulmonary vein
Pulmonary ligament
Groove for inferior vena cava
Base of lung
Oblique fissure
Cardiac impression
Groove for right
subclavian artery
Groove for superior
vena cava
Groove for azygos vein
Anterior border
Upper right
pulmonary vein
Horizontal fissure
Apex
Fig. 18.6 The impressions produced by mediastinal structures on the medial surface of the left lung. (Source: Fig. 63.7, 
Page 1067, Gray’s Anatomy: The Anatomical Basis of Clinical Practice, 39th ed., Susan Standring (Editor-in-Chief). 
Elsevier Ltd, 2005, All rights reserved.)
Groove for left
subclavian artery
Groove for left
brachiocephalic vein
Pulmonary artery
Left principal
bronchus
Left pulmonary
veins
Cardiac
impression
Cardiac notch
Lingula
Apex
Groove for aorta
Posterior border
Pulmonary ligament
Inferior border
--- Page 254 ---
Lungs (Pulmones)
The oblique fissure in left lung runs obliquely downwards 
and forwards crossing the posterior border about 6 cm below 
the apex and inferior border almost at its apex. It separates 
the superior lobe from the inferior lobe.
N.B.
• The oblique fissure acts as a plane of cleavage so that 
during inspiration, the upper part of lung expands 
forwards and laterally, whereas the lower part of the lung 
expands downwards and backwards.
• In X-ray chest PA view, the horizontal fissure is visible in 
60% of the cases. The oblique fissure is usually visible in 
X-ray chest lateral view.
• Oblique fissure of left lung is more vertical than the 
oblique fissure of the right lung.
• Identification of the completeness of the fissure: It is 
important before performing lobectomy (i.e., removal of 
the lobe of the lung because individuals with incomplete 
fissures are more prone to develop postoperative air 
leakage than those with complete fissures).
• Accessory lobes and fissures
– Lobe of azygos vein (Fig. 18.7): Sometimes the medial 
part of the superior lobe is partially separated by a 
fissure of variable length, which contains the terminal 
part of the azygos vein, enclosed in the free margin of a 
mesentery derived from the mediastinal pleura. This is 
termed lobe of azygos vein. It varies in size and 
sometimes includes the apex of the lung.
– A left horizontal fissure is a normal variant found in 10% 
of the individuals.
Clinical correlation
ROOT OF THE LUNG
The root of lung is a short broad pedicle connecting the 
medial surface of the lung with the mediastinum. It consists 
of structures entering and leaving the lung at hilum.
The hilum is the area on the mediastinal surface of the 
lung through which structures enter or leave the lung.
The root of lung is surrounded by a tubular sheath derived 
from the mediastinal pleura.
COMPONENTS
The root of lung consists of the following structures:
1. Principal bronchus in the left lung, and eparterial and 
hyparterial bronchi in the right lung.
2. Pulmonary artery.
3. Pulmonary veins (two in number).
4. Bronchial arteries (one on the right side and two on the 
left side).
5. Bronchial veins.
6. Lymphatics of the lung.
7. Anterior and posterior pulmonary plexuses of the 
nerves.
N.B. The root of lung lies opposite the bodies of T5, T6, 
and T7 vertebrae.
ARRANGEMENT OF STRUCTURES IN THE ROOT OF THE 
LUNG AT THE HILUM (Fig. 18.8)
The arrangement of structures in the roots of the lungs is as 
follows:
1. From before backwards (it is more or less similar on 
two sides):
(a) Pulmonary vein (superior)
(b) Pulmonary artery
(c) Bronchus (left principal bronchus on the left side, 
and eparterial, and hyparterial bronchus on the 
right side).
Mnemonic: VAB (Vein, Artery, and Bronchus).
2. From above downwards (it differs on two sides):
Right side
Left side
• Eparterial bronchus
Pulmonary artery
• Pulmonary artery
Left principal bronchus
• Hyparterial bronchus
Inferior pulmonary vein
• Inferior pulmonary vein
N.B. The difference in the arrangement of structures from 
above downwards on the two sides is because right principal 
bronchus before entering the lung at hilum divides into two 
lobar bronchi, the upper lobar bronchus passes above the 
pulmonary artery (eparterial bronchus) and lower lobar 
bronchus passes below the pulmonary artery (hyparterial 
bronchus).
Fig. 18.7 Formation of azygos lobe of the lung.
Pulmonary
pleura
Azygos lobe
Mesentery of
azygos arch
Azygos venous
arch
--- Page 255 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
RELATIONS OF THE ROOT OF THE LUNG
Anterior:
• Phrenic nerve.
• Anterior pulmonary plexus.
• Superior vena cava (on right side only).
Posterior:
• Vagus nerve.
• Posterior pulmonary plexus.
• Descending thoracic aorta (on left side only).
Superior:
• Arch of azygos vein (on right side only).
• Arch of aorta (on left side only).
Inferior:
• Pulmonary ligament.
Hilar shadow in chest radiograph: In X-ray chest 
posteroanterior (PA) view, the root of each lung casts a 
radiopaque shadow called hilar shadow in the medial 
one-third of the lung field. The shadow is in fact cast by 
pulmonary vessels when seen end on. The enlargements of 
bronchopulmonary lymph nodes (hilar lymph nodes) 
increase the density of the hilar shadows.
Clinical correlation
The differences between the right and left lungs are given 
in Table 18.2.
SURFACE MARKINGS (Fig. 18.9)
1. Margins: The lung margins approximately coincide with 
those of the pleura (see page 241), except at the following 
points:
(a) Lower border: The lower border of each lung is two-
rib spaces higher than the lower border of the 
pleura. Thus, it lies along the line, which cuts
(i) 6th rib in the midclavicular line,
(ii) 8th rib in the midaxillary line, and
(iii) 10th rib at the lateral border of erector spinae 
and ends 2 cm lateral to the spine of T10 
vertebra.
(b) Anterior border: The anterior border of the left lung 
has a distinct notch (the cardiac notch), which 
passes laterally behind the 4th and 5th intercostal 
spaces.
(c) Posterior border: Its lower end ends at the level of 
spine of T10 vertebra.
2. Fissures
(a) The oblique fissure is marked by a line drawn 
obliquely downwards and outwards from 1 inch 
(2.5 cm) lateral to the T5 spine to the 6th costal 
cartilage about 1½ inches (4 cm) from the midline.
 
In clinical practice, ask the patients to abduct the 
shoulder to its full extent; the line of oblique fissure in 
Fig. 18.8 Arrangement of structures in the roots of right and left lungs.
Left pulmonary
artery
Superior pulmonary
vein
Eparterial
bronchus
Hyparterial
bronchus
Bronchial
arteries
Left principal
bronchus
Pulmonary
ligament
Right pulmonary
artery
Superior pulmonary
vein
Inferior pulmonary
vein
Inferior pulmonary
vein
Inferior
Superior
Anterior
Posterior
Inferior
Superior
Posterior
Anterior
Table 18.2 Differences between the right and left lungs
Right lung
Left lung
Size and shape
Larger, shorter, and broader
Smaller, longer, and narrower
Weight
700 g
650 g
Lobes
Three (upper, middle, and lower)
Two lobes (upper and lower)
Fissure
Two (horizontal and oblique)
One (oblique)
Anterior border
Straight
Not straight (presents a cardiac notch)
Hilum
Two bronchi (eparterial and hyparterial)
One bronchus (left principal bronchus)
--- Page 256 ---
Lungs (Pulmones)
this position corresponds to the medial border of the 
rotated scapula.
(b) The transverse fissure is marked by a line drawn 
horizontally along the 4th costal cartilage, and 
meets the oblique fissure where the latter crosses the 
5th rib.
Auscultation of lungs: Visualization of lungs from the 
surface for listening lung sounds (Fig. 18.10): During 
auscultation of lung sounds, it is of utmost importance for the 
clinicians to visualize the lungs from the surface as follows:
Clinical correlation
• Anteriorly: The right side of chest primarily presents upper 
and middle lobes separated by the horizontal fissure at 
about the 5th rib in the midaxillary line to 4th rib at the 
sternum. The left side of chest primarily presents upper 
lobe, which is separated from the lower lobe by oblique 
fissure extending from the 5th rib in the midaxillary line to 
the 6th rib at the midclavicular line.
• Posteriorly: Except for apices, posterior aspect of chest 
on either side primarily presents lower lobe extending 
from spinous process of T3–T10 or T12 vertebrae.
• Right lateral: The lung lies deep to the area extending 
from axilla to the level of the 7th or 8th rib. The upper lobe 
is demarcated at the level of the 5th rib in the midaxillary 
line and 6th rib in the midclavicular line.
• Left lateral: The lung lies deep to the area extending from 
axilla to the 7th or 8th rib. The upper lobe is demarcated at 
the level of the 5th rib in the midaxillary line and 6th rib in 
the midclavicular line.
N.B. Key points to remember during auscultation of lungs:
• The superior lobe of the right lung is audible above the 
4th rib.
• The middle lobe of the right lung is audible between the 
4th and the 6th rib.
• The lower lobes of both lungs are audible below the 6th 
rib on the front.
• The inferior lobes of the right and left lungs are best 
examined on the back, especially in the region of the 
triangle of auscultation.
INTERNAL STRUCTURE
The lung is mainly made up of intrapulmonary bronchial 
tree, which is concerned with the conduction of air to-and-
fro from the lung, and pulmonary units, which are concerned 
with the gaseous exchange within the lung (for detailed 
structure see textbooks on Histology).
BRONCHIAL TREE (Fig. 18.11)
The bronchial tree consists of principal bronchus, lobar 
bronchi, terminal bronchioles, and respiratory bronchioles.
Principal Bronchi (Figs 18.12 and 18.13)
The trachea divides outside the lungs, at the level of the lower 
border of T4 vertebra, into two primary (principal) 
bronchi—right and left for right and left lung, respectively:
1. Right principal bronchus is shorter, wider, and more 
vertical. It is about 1 inch (2.5 cm) long and lies more or 
less in line with the trachea.
2. Left principal bronchus is narrower, longer, and more 
horizontal than the right. It is about 2 inches (5 cm) 
long and does not lie in line with the trachea.
Fig. 18.9 Surface markings of the lung and pleura on the 
front: A, shows the relationship of lungs and pleurae in the 
thoracic case; B, shows outlines of lung and pleura. Note 
outline of lung are shown by blue line and pleura by red line.
Right costoxiphoid
angle
Cervical pleura
Apex of lung
Cardiac notch
Horizontal fissure
Costodiaphragmatic
recess
Oblique fissure
Oblique fissure
Sternoclavicular
joint
Site of sternal angle
Just above the
xiphisternal joint
6th costal
cartilage
6th rib
8th rib
Area of superficial
cardiac dullness
Level of 4th
costal cartilage
--- Page 257 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
The long axis of right principal bronchus deviates about 25° 
from the long axis of the trachea, whereas long axis of the left 
principal deviates about 45° from the long axis of the trachea.
The left principal bronchus passes to the left below the 
arch of aorta and in front of the esophagus.
• Aspiration of foreign body into the right principal 
bronchus: The inhaled foreign bodies usually enter in the 
right principal bronchus because it is shorter, wider and in 
line with the trachea. Since the inhaled foreign particles 
tend to enter in the right principal bronchus, hence in the 
right lung. As a result, lung abscess occurs more 
commonly in the right lung.
• Bronchoscopy (Fig. 18.14): It is a procedure, in which a 
flexible, fibre-optic bronchoscope is introduced in the 
trachea to visualize the interior of the trachea and bronchi. 
The carina, a keel-like median ridge at the bifurcation of 
the trachea is an important landmark visible through the 
bronchoscope. The widening and distortion of the angle 
between the principal bronchi (distorting the position of
Clinical correlation
 carina) seen in bronchoscopy is serious prognostic sign, 
since it usually indicates carcinomatous involvement of 
tracheobronchial lymph nodes. The carina of trachea is 
also a very sensitive area for cough reflex.
• Bronchiogenic carcinoma: It is the commonest cancer 
in the males especially in chronic cigarette smokers. It 
usually arises from epithelial lining of the bronchi and 
forms well-circumscribed grey white mass in the lung. 
A presence of circular shadow (popularly called 
coin-shadow) in plane X-ray chest (PA view) may be the 
only finding in an otherwise asymptomatic patient.
 The bronchiogenic carcinoma may spread (metastasis) to 
brain by both arterial and venous routes as under:
− Arterial root
 Lung capillaries → pulmonary vein → left atrium → left 
ventricle → aorta → internal carotid and vertebral 
arteries → brain
− Venous route
 Bronchial veins → azygos vein → external vertebral 
venous plexus → internal vertebral venous plexus → 
cranial dural venous sinuses → brain.
Fig. 18.10 Surface projection of different lobes of lungs (RUL = right upper lobe, LUL = left upper lobe, RML = right middle 
lobe, RLL = right lower lobe, LLL = left lower lobe).
Spinous process
of T12
Spinous process
of T10
Spinous process
of T3
6th rib in the
midclavicular line
5th rib in the
midaxillary line
4th rib
Left lateral
Posterior
Anterior
Right lateral
Spinous process
of T3
6th rib in the
midclavicular line
4th rib
5th rib in the
midaxillary line
Spinous process
of T3
6th rib in the
midclavicular line
--- Page 258 ---
Lungs (Pulmones)
LOBAR BRONCHI
On entering the lung, the right principal bronchus divides 
(gives off) three lobar bronchi, one for each lobe of the right 
lung. The left principal bronchus on entering the lung divides 
into two lobar bronchi, one for each lobe of the left lung.
TERTIARY (SEGMENTAL) BRONCHI
Each lobar bronchus divides into segmental (tertiary) 
bronchi, one for each bronchopulmonary segment.
The segmental bronchi divide repeatedly to form very 
small bronchi called terminal bronchioles. The terminal 
bronchioles give off respiratory bronchioles, which lack 
cartilage in their walls.
Each respiratory bronchiole aerates a small portion of 
lung called pulmonary units, which is concerned with 
gaseous exchange within the lung.
Fig. 18.11 Bronchial tree.
Respiratory bronchiole
Terminal bronchiole
Lobar bronchiole
Conducting portion
Respiratory portion
Terminal bronchus
Segmental (tertiary)
bronchus
Lobar (secondary)
bronchus
Principal (primary)
bronchus
Trachea
Alveolar duct
Alveoli
Alveolar sac
Atrium
Fig. 18.12 Relation of principal bronchi.
Thoracic duct
Trachea
Esophagus
Arch of azygos
vein
Right principal
bronchus
Arch of aorta
Left vagus nerve
Left recurrent 
laryngeal nerve
Left principal
bronchus
Fig. 18.13 Trachea and principal bronchi.
Trachea
Left
bronchus
Right
bronchus
Fig. 18.14 Lower end of trachea and its main branches as 
seen on bronchoscopy. (Source: Fig. 3.48A, Page 151, 
Gray's Anatomy for Students, Richard L Drake, Wayne Vogl, 
Adam WM Mitchell. Copyright Elsevier Inc. 2005, All rights 
reserved.)
Left main bronchus
Right main bronchus
Carina
--- Page 259 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
PULMONARY UNITS
Each pulmonary unit consists of
(a) alveolar ducts,
(b) atria,
(c) air saccules, and
(d) alveoli.
N.B.
• The respiratory bronchiole represents the transitional 
zone/part between the conducting and respiratory 
portions of the respiratory system.
• The alveoli are specialized sac-like structures which form 
greater part of the lungs. They are the main sites for the 
gaseous exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide 
between the inspired air and blood.
Emphysema: In this condition, alveoli of lungs are damaged 
by chemicals released by pollutants. Clinically it presents as 
shortness of breath and the chest appears barrel shaped in 
chest radiograph.
Clinical correlation
ARTERIAL SUPPLY OF THE LUNGS
The lungs are supplied by two sets of arteries, viz.
1. Bronchial arteries.
2. Pulmonary arteries.
BRONCHIAL ARTERIES
The bronchial arteries supply nutrition to the bronchial tree 
and pulmonary tissue.
The right lung is supplied by one bronchial artery, which 
arises from the right third posterior intercostal artery or 
from upper left bronchial artery. The left lung is supplied by 
two bronchial arteries, which arise from descending thoracic 
aorta.
PULMONARY ARTERIES
The pulmonary arteries supply deoxygenated blood to the 
lungs. There is one pulmonary artery for each lung. They are 
the branches of the pulmonary trunk.
The right and left pulmonary arteries lie anterior to the 
principal (primary) bronchi as they enter the hilum of their 
respective lungs. The right pulmonary artery is crossed 
superiorly by the arch of the azygos vein; whereas the left 
pulmonary artery lies inferior to the arch of aorta, at the level 
of T5 vertebra. The pulmonary arteries divide into lobar 
branches in the hilum and subsequently divide into terminal/
segmental branches. The segmental branches, branch 
successively corresponding with the segmental branches of 
the bronchial tree (Fig. 18.15).
VENOUS DRAINAGE
The venous blood from lungs is also drained by two sets of 
veins, viz.
1. Bronchial veins.
2. Pulmonary veins.
Bronchial veins: The bronchial veins drain the deoxygenated 
blood from the bronchial tree and pulmonary tissue. There 
are two bronchial veins on each side:
 
 The right bronchial veins drain into azygos veins.
 
 The left bronchial veins drain into hemiazygos vein or left 
superior intercostal vein.
Pulmonary 
veins: The 
pulmonary 
veins 
drain 
oxygenated blood from the lungs. There are two pulmonary 
veins on each side.
The pulmonary veins do not accompany the pulmonary 
arteries. 
tributaries 
pulmonary 
veins 
intersegmental, while branches of pulmonary arteries are 
segmental in distribution.
N.B.
• All the veins in the body drain deoxygenated blood 
except pulmonary veins, which drain the oxygenated 
blood from the lungs.
• All the arteries of the body supply oxygenated blood 
except pulmonary arteries, which supply deoxygenated 
blood to the lungs.
• The bronchial arteries provide nutrition to the bronchial 
tree, as far as the respiratory bronchioles, i.e., non-
respiratory portions of the lungs.
• The respiratory portions of the lungs are nourished by 
pulmonary capillary beds and atmospheric air in the 
alveoli.
Aortic arch
Trachea
Azygos arch
Pulmonary 
trunk 
Right pulmonary
artery
Left pulmonary
artery
Fig. 18.15 Relationship of the pulmonary arteries to bronchi.
--- Page 260 ---
Lungs (Pulmones)
Fig. 18.16 Lymphatic drainage of the lungs.
Pretracheal nodes
Paratracheal nodes
Superior tracheobronchial nodes
Hilar (bronchopulmonary) nodes
Superficial lymph vessels
Deep lymph vessels
Visceral pleura
Inferior tracheobronchial nodes
LYMPHATIC DRAINAGE
The lymphatic drainage of the lung is clinically important 
because lung cancer spreads by lymphatic path.
The lymph from the lung is drained by two sets of lymph 
vessels (Fig. 18.16):
1. Superficial vessels.
2. Deep vessels.
Superficial lymph vessels: These vessels drain the 
peripheral lung tissue lying beneath the visceral pleura. 
They form the superficial (subpleural) plexus beneath the 
visceral pleura. The vessels from plexus pass around the 
borders and margins of the fissures of lung to reach the 
hilum where they drain into the bronchopulmonary (hilar) 
lymph nodes.
Deep lymph vessels: These vessels drain the bronchial tree, 
pulmonary vessels, and connective tissue septa and form 
deep plexus. The vessels from deep plexus run along the 
bronchi and pulmonary vessels towards the hilum of the 
lung passing through pulmonary lymph nodes located 
within the lung substance, and finally drain into 
bronchopulmonary (hilar) lymph nodes.
Thus both superficial and deep lymphatic plexuses drain 
into bronchopulmonary (hilar) lymph nodes. From hilar 
lymph nodes, the lymph is drained into the superior and 
inferior tracheobronchial lymph nodes located superior and 
inferior to the bifurcation of the trachea, respectively. These 
nodes in turn drain into pre- and paratracheal lymph nodes, 
and right and left bronchomediastinal lymph trunk, which 
finally drain into right lymphatic duct and thoracic duct on 
the right and left sides respectively.
N.B. All the lymph from the lung is drained into 
tracheobronchial lymph nodes (located at the hilum), which 
in turn drain into bronchomediastinal lymph nodes.
NERVE SUPPLY
The lung is supplied by both parasympathetic and 
sympathetic nerve fibres:
The parasympathetic fibres are derived from the vagus 
nerve and sympathetic fibres are derived from T2 to T5 
spinal segments. Both provide motor supply to the bronchial 
muscles and secretomotor supply to the mucous glands of 
the bronchial tree.
The parasympathetic fibres cause bronchoconstriction/ 
bronchospasm, vasodilatation, and increased mucous 
secretion. The sympathetic fibres cause bronchodilatation, 
vasoconstriction, and decreased mucous secretion.
The afferent impulse arising from the bronchial mucous 
membrane and stretch receptors in the alveolar walls pass to 
the central nervous system through both sympathetic and 
parasympathetic fibres.
--- Page 261 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
• Bronchial asthma: It is a common disease of the 
respiratory system. It occurs due to bronchospasm (spasm 
of smooth muscle in the wall of bronchioles) which 
reduces the diameter of the bronchioles. As a result, 
patient has great difficulty during expiration, although 
inspiration is accomplished normally. The airflow is further 
impeded due to presence of excessive mucous which the 
patient is unable to clear because an effective cough 
cannot be produced. Clinically the asthma is characterized 
by (a) difficulty in breathing (dyspnea) and (b) wheezing. 
The sympathomimetic drugs such as epinephrine cause 
vasodilatation and relieve the bronchial asthma.
• Bronchiectasis: It is a clinical condition, in which bronchi 
and bronchioles are dilated permanently as a result of 
chronic necrotizing infection. They become filled with pus 
leading to airway obstruction. The basal segments of the 
lower lobe are prone to this condition.
• Aspiration pneumonia: In supine position, aspirated 
material usually enters into superior (apical segment) of 
the lower lobe, especially on the right side for it is the most 
dependent segment in this position. It leads to collection 
of secretions which may obstruct the bronchus leading to 
collapse of the superior segment of the lower lobe 
(atelectasis) and pneumonia.
Clinical correlation
BRONCHOPULMONARY SEGMENTS
The bronchopulmonary segments are well-defined, wedge-
shaped sectors of the lung, which are aerated by tertiary 
(segmental) bronchi (Fig. 18.17).
Fig. 18.17 Schematic diagram showing three bronchopulmonary segments (I, II, and III).
Table 18.3 Bronchopulmonary segments
Lobes
Segments
Right lung
• Superior
 1. Apical
 2. Posterior
 3. Anterior
• Middle
 4. Lateral
 5. Medial
• Inferior
 6. Superior (apical)
 7. Medial basal
 8. Anterior basal
 9. Lateral basal
 10. Posterior basal
Left lung
• Superior
 1. Apical
 2. Posterior
 3. Anterior
 4. Superior lingular
 5. Inferior lingular
• Inferior
 6. Superior (apical)
 7. Medial basal
 8. Anterior basal
 9. Lateral basal
 10. Posterior basal
Pulmonary artery
(segmental branch)
Tertiary/segmental
bronchus
Bronchial artery
(segmental branch)
Intersegmental planes
Pulmonary venule in
intersegmental plane
--- Page 262 ---
Lungs (Pulmones)
Characteristic features:
1. It is a subdivision of the lobe of the lung.
2. It is pyramidal in shape with apex directed towards the 
hilum and base towards the surface of the lung.
3. It is surrounded by the connective tissue.
4. It is aerated by the segmental (tertiary) bronchus.
5. Each segment has its own artery, a segmental branch of 
the pulmonary artery.
6. Each segment has its own lymphatic drainage and 
autonomic supply.
Thus, bronchopulmonary segments are the well-defined 
anatomical, functional, and surgical units of the lungs.
N.B. The segmental veins (the tributaries of pulmonary veins) 
run in the intersegmental planes of the connective tissue.
NUMBER AND NOMENCLATURE OF 
BRONCHOPULMONARY SEGMENTS 
(Figs 18.18 and 18.19)
The number and terms used to designate the segments vary 
among different authors, but in this book, the number and 
terms accepted by the International Congress of Anatomists, 
(1960) has been adopted.
Fig. 18.18 Bronchopulmonary segments of the right lung 
as seen on: A, lateral aspect; B, medial aspect; C, lobar and 
segmental bronchi.
Fig. 18.19 Bronchopulmonary segments of the left lung as 
seen on: A, lateral aspect; B, medial aspect; C, lobar and 
segmental bronchi.
Upper lobe
bronchus
Lingular
bronchus
Lower lobe
bronchus
Upper lobe
bronchus
Middle lobe
bronchus
Lower lobe
bronchus
There are 10 segments in each lung. They are named and 
numbered in Table 18.3. The bronchopulmonary segments 
of right and left lungs are shown in Figures 18.18 and 18.19 
respectively.
Segmental resection of the lung: The knowledge of the 
bronchopulmonary segments has led to the advancement in 
conservation lung surgery. Since each segment is an 
independent functional unit having its own bronchovascular 
supply and potential planes of separation exist between the 
segments. Localized chronic disease, such as tuberculosis, 
bronchiectasis or benign neoplasm is restricted to one 
segment; it is, therefore, possible to dissect out and remove 
the diseased segment leaving the surrounding tissue intact. 
This procedure is called segmental resection.
Clinical correlation
N.B.
• During segmental dissection, it is important not to ligate 
intersegmental veins as they will interfere with the venous 
drainage of the surrounding healthy segments.
• Segmental resection is most often carried out in 
bronchiectasis.
--- Page 264 ---
Mediastinum
CHAPTER
The mediastinum (L. middle septum) is the median septum 
of thoracic cavity between the two pleural cavities. It consists 
of all the viscera and structures of the thoracic cavity (e.g., 
heart and its great blood vessels, esophagus, trachea and 
principal bronchi, aorta, mediastinal lymph nodes, etc.) 
except the lungs. The mediastinum occupies the central 
compartment of the thoracic cavity. Thus strictly speaking, it 
is a broad central partition, which separates the two laterally 
placed pleural cavities (Fig. 19.1). It is covered on either side 
by the mediastinal pleura.
BOUNDARIES (Figs 19.2 and 19.4)
Anterior: 
Sternum.
Posterior: 
Vertebral column (bodies of thoracic vertebrae 
and intervening intervertebral discs).
Superior: 
Superior thoracic aperture.
Inferior: 
Diaphragm.
On each side: Mediastinal pleura.
N.B. The mediastinum is not a rigid structure as observed 
by the students in the cadaver (embalmed dead body). In a 
living individual, mediastinum is a highly mobile septum 
because it consists primarily of hollow visceral structures 
bound together by loose connective tissue, often infiltrated 
with fat.
CONTENTS
The major contents of mediastinum are (Fig. 19.2):
1. Thymus.
2. Heart enclosed in the pericardial sac.
Left pleural
cavity
Right pleural
cavity
Mediastinum
Fig. 19.1 Cross section of the thorax showing the position 
of the mediastinum.
Trachea
Thoracic inlet
Thymus
Heart
Diaphragm
Esophagus
Aorta
Left common carotid
artery
Left subclavian
artery 
Right pulmonary
artery
Left principal
bronchus
Left subclavian 
artery
Sternum
Fig. 19.2 Boundaries and contents of the mediastinum. 
Note that all the mediastinal structures are not depicted 
(IVC = inferior vena cava).
--- Page 265 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
3. Major arteries and veins such as thoracic aorta, 
pulmonary trunk, etc.
4. Trachea.
5. Esophagus.
6. Thoracic duct.
7. Neural structures, such as sympathetic trunks, vagus 
nerves, phrenic nerve, etc.
8. Lymph nodes.
The structures forming the right and left surfaces of the 
mediastinum as shown in Figure 19.3.
Trachea
Right brachiocephalic vein
Esophagus
Root of right lung
Superior vena cava
Right atrium covered
with pericardium
Azygos vein
2. Right vagus nerve
3. Right phrenic nerve
Three neural structures
1. Sympathetic chain
Esophagus
Trachea
Left subclavian artery
Left common carotid
artery
Arch of aorta
Left recurrent
laryngeal nerve
Left ventricle covered
by pericardium 
Thoracic duct 
Left vagus nerve
Root of left lung
Three neural structures
1. Sympathetic chain
2. Left vagus nerve
3. Left phrenic nerve
Fig. 19.3 Mediastinal structures as seen from its lateral aspect in sagittal section of the thorax: A, right side; B, left side.
--- Page 266 ---
Mediastinum
DIVISIONS
For the purpose of description and organization of structures 
the mediastinum is artificially divided into two parts: 
(a) superior mediastinum and (b) inferior mediastinum by 
an imaginary plane (transverse thoracic plane) passing 
through the sternal angle anteriorly, and lower border of the 
body of the fourth thoracic (T4) vertebra/intervertebral disc 
T4 and T5 vertebrae posteriorly.
The inferior mediastinum is further subdivided into three 
parts by the pericardium (enclosing heart). The part in front 
of the pericardium is called anterior mediastinum, and the 
part behind the pericardium is called posterior mediastinum. 
The pericardium and its contents (heart and roots of its great 
vessels) constitute the middle mediastinum (Fig. 19.4).
The divisions and subdivisions of the mediastinum are 
shown in Flowchart 19.1.
Visualization of subdivisions of mediastinum in chest 
radiograph: 
subdivisions 
mediastinum 
well-appreciated in lateral view of X-ray chest (Fig. 19.5).
• The shadow above the sternal plane represents superior 
mediastinum.
• The subdivisions of inferior mediastinum are demarcated 
as under:
(a) cardiac shadow above the anterior part of diaphragm 
represents the middle mediastinum.
(b) retrosternal space/space in the front of cardiac shadow 
represents the anterior mediastinum.
(c) retrocardiac space/space between the cardiac shadow 
and shadow of vertebral column represents the 
posterior mediastinum.
Clinical correlation
SUPERIOR MEDIASTINUM
Boundaries (Fig. 19.4)
Anterior: 
Manubrium sterni.
Posterior: 
Bodies of upper four thoracic vertebrae.
Superior: 
Plane of superior thoracic aperture.
Inferior: 
An imaginary plane passing through the 
sternal angle in front and lower border of the 
body of fourth thoracic vertebra behind 
(transverse thoracic plane).
On each side Mediastinal pleura.
(lateral):
Vertebral column
(thoracic vertebrae and
intervening intervertebral
discs)
Superior mediastinum 
Sternal plane
Plane of superior
thoracic inlet
• Anterior mediastinum
• Middle mediastinum
• Posterior mediastinum
Inferior mediastinum
Sternum
Diaphragm
Fig. 19.4 Divisions of the mediastinum.
Mediastinum
Anterior
mediastinum
Middle
mediastinum
Posterior
mediastinum
Superior mediastinum
Inferior mediastinum
Flowchart 19.1 Divisions and subdivisions of the mediastinum.
Fig. 19.5 Parts of the mediastinum demonstrated on a chest 
radiograph (lateral view). (Source: Fig. 4.13, Page 99, Integrated 
Anatomy, David JA Heylings, Roy AJ Spence, Barry E Kelly. 
Copyright Elsevier Limited 2007, All rights reserved.)
Superior
Posterior
Anterior
Middle
--- Page 267 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
Contents (Figs 19.6 and 19.7)
1. Arteries
(a) Arch of aorta.
(b) Brachiocephalic artery.
(c) Left common carotid artery.
(d) Left subclavian artery.
2. Veins
(a) Right and left brachiocephalic veins.
(b) Upper half of the superior vena cava (SVC).
(c) Left superior intercostal vein.
3. Nerves
(a) Phrenic nerves (right and left).
(b) Vagus nerves (right and left).
(c) Sympathetic trunks and cardiac nerves (right and 
left).
(d) Left recurrent laryngeal nerves.
4. Lymphoid organs and lymphatics
(a) Lymph nodes.
(b) Thoracic duct.
(c) Thymus.
5. Tubes
(a) Trachea.
(b) Esophagus.
6. Muscles
(a) Sternohyoid.
(b) Sternothyroid.
Longus colli.
Fig. 19.6 Arrangement of structures in the superior mediastinum as seen in dissection. Note that great veins are anterior to 
the great arteries.
Esophagus
Trachea
Brachiocephalic artery
Right vagus nerve
Right brachiocephalic vein
 Left brachiocephalic vein
 Superior vena cava
Left recurrent laryngeal
nerve
Left common carotid
artery
Left vagus nerve
Left subclavian artery
Arch of aorta
Pericardium 
Left superior intercostal
vein
Left sympathetic chain 
Longus colli
Right sympathetic
chain
Esophagus
Trachea
Right vagus nerve
Right phrenic nerve
Right brachiocephalic
vein
Brachiocephalic artery
Thymus
Thoracic duct
Recurrent laryngeal nerve
Left subclavian artery
Left vagus nerve
Left common carotid artery
Left phrenic nerve
Left brachiocephalic vein
Sternothyroid
Sternohyoid
Fig. 19.7 Transverse section of superior mediastinum showing the arrangement of its contents.
--- Page 268 ---
Mediastinum
N.B. For the purpose of orientation during surgery, the 
major structures of superior mediastinum are arranged in 
the following order from anterior to posterior:
• Thymus
• Large veins
• Large arteries
• Trachea
• Esophagus and thoracic duct
• Sympathetic trunks.
Potential dead space in superior mediastinum: In 
superior mediastinum, all large veins (superior vena cava, 
right and left brachiocephalic veins) are on the right side 
and all the large arteries (arch of aorta and its three 
branches) are on the left side. Consequently, during 
increased blood flow, the large veins expand enormously 
while the large arteries do not expand at all. This is because 
there is sufficient dead space on the right side. It is into this 
space that tumors of mediastinum tend to project.
Clinical correlation
ANTERIOR MEDIASTINUM
Boundaries (Fig. 19.4)
Anterior: 
Body of sternum.
Posterior: 
Pericardium enclosing heart.
Superior: 
Transverse thoracic plane separating superior 
and inferior mediastinum.
Inferior: 
Diaphragm.
On each side: Mediastinal pleura.
Contents
1. Loose areolar tissue.
2. Superior and inferior sternopericardial ligaments
stretching between sternum and pericardium.
3. Three or four lymph nodes.
4. Mediastinal branches of internal thoracic (mammary) 
arteries.
5. Lower portion of thymus (in children).
The anterior mediastinum is a very narrow space. It is 
continuous 
through 
superior 
mediastinum 
with 
pretracheal space of the neck. Therefore, neck infection in 
pretracheal space may spread into the anterior mediastinum.
Clinical correlation
MIDDLE MEDIASTINUM
Boundaries (Fig. 19.4)
Anterior: 
Anterior mediastinum.
Posterior: 
Posterior mediastinum.
Superior: 
Superior mediastinum.
Inferior: 
Diaphragm.
Contents (Fig. 19.8)
1. Heart
2. Pericardium
3. Arteries:
(a) Ascending aorta
(b) Pulmonary trunk dividing into two pulmonary 
arteries
(c) Pericardiophrenic arteries
4. Veins:
(a) Superior vena cava (lower half)
(b) Azygos vein (terminal part)
(c) Pulmonary veins (right and left)
5. Nerves:
(a) Phrenic nerves
(b) Deep cardiac plexus
6. Lymph nodes:
(a) Tracheobronchial lymph nodes
7. Tubes:
(a) Bifurcation of trachea
(b) Right and left principal bronchi
N.B. The main contents of middle mediastinum are 
pericardium and its contents (e.g., the heart and roots of its 
great vessels).
POSTERIOR MEDIASTINUM
Boundaries (Fig. 19.4)
Anterior: 
(a) pericardium and its contents, (b) bifurcation 
of the trachea, and (c) pulmonary vessels.
Fig. 19.8 Main contents of the middle mediastinum.
Superior vena
cava
Azygos vein
Right pulmonary
veins
Ascending aorta
HEART 
Left pulmonary
veins
Pulmonary 
trunk
--- Page 271 ---
Pericardium and Heart
CHAPTER
PERICARDIUM
The pericardium (G. around heart) is a fibroserous sac which 
encloses the heart and the roots of its great blood vessels. The 
pericardium lies within the middle mediastinum, posterior 
to the body of the sternum and 2nd–6th costal cartilages and 
anterior to the middle four thoracic vertebrae (i.e., from T5 
to T8).
The functions of the pericardium are:
(a) restricts excessive movements of the heart,
(b) serves as a lubricated container in which heart can 
contract and relax smoothly, and
(c) limits the cardiac distension.
SUBDIVISIONS
The pericardium consists of two components:
(a) an outer single layered fibrous sac called fibrous 
pericardium, and
(b) inner double layered serous sac called serous 
pericardium.
A little description of embryology makes it easier to 
understand the formation of different layers of the 
pericardium.
The heart and great vessels lie inside the fibrous sac and 
invaginate the serous sac from behind during development. 
As a result, the external surface of the heart and internal 
surface of the fibrous pericardium are covered by a layer of 
serous pericardium. The layer covering the surface of the 
heart is called visceral pericardium or epicardium and the 
layer covering the inner aspect of the fibrous pericardium is 
called parietal pericardium. The intervening potential space 
between the two serous layers is called pericardial cavity 
(Fig. 20.1).
The pericardium thus consists of three layers (Fig. 20.2). 
From outside to inwards these are:
1. Fibrous layer of the pericardium.
2. Parietal layer of the serous pericardium.
3. Visceral layer of the serous pericardium (epicardium).
FIBROUS PERICARDIUM
The fibrous pericardium is strong fibrous sac which supports 
the delicate parietal layer of the serous pericardium with 
which it is firmly adherent.
Features
The features of fibrous pericardium are as follows:
1. It is conical in shape.
Fig. 20.1 Development of different layers of the pericardium.
 Developing heart
Fibrous
pericardium
Large blood vessel
Parietal layer of
serous pericardium
Visceral layer of
serous pericardium
Pericardial cavity
Pericardial
cavity
Heart
Serous 
pericardium
--- Page 273 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
It is a horizontal passage between the two pericardial 
tubes. On each side it communicates with the general 
pericardial cavity.
Oblique Sinus of Pericardium
It is a recess of serous pericardium behind the base of the 
heart (actually left atrium). It is enclosed by ‘J-shaped’ sheath 
of visceral layer of serous pericardium enclosing six veins 
(i.e., 2 vena cavae and 4 pulmonary veins).
The oblique sinus is akin to lesser sac behind the stomach 
and develops as a result of absorption of four pulmonary 
veins into the left atrium. The oblique sinus permits the 
distension of left atrium during return of oxygenated blood 
in it from the lungs.
Parietal layer of
serous pericardium
Visceral layer of
serous pericardium
Pulmonary trunk
Left pulmonary veins
Superior vena cava
Ascending aorta
Right pulmonary veins
Visceral layer of
serous pericardium
Transverse sinus
Oblique sinus
Fig. 20.3 Interior of the serous pericardial sac after section of the large vessels and removal of the heart showing transverse 
and oblique pericardial sinuses (SVC = superior vena cava, IVC = inferior vena cava).
Crista terminalis
Right pulmonary vein
Right atrium
Left atrium
Right auricle
Parietal pericardium
Pulmonary trunk
Ascending aorta
Arrow in transverse
pericardial sinus
Left auricle
Left pulmonary
vein
Oblique sinus of
pericardium
Fig. 20.4 Cross section of heart through the atria showing reflection of pericardium and formation of transverse and oblique 
pericardial sinuses. Note that the left atrium lies behind the pulmonary trunk and aorta, from which it is separated by 
transverse sinus of the pericardium.
--- Page 274 ---
Pericardium and Heart
Boundaries
Oblique sinus of pericardium is bounded in the following 
way:
Anteriorly: 
by left atrium.
Posteriorly: 
by parietal pericardium.
On right side: 
by reflection of visceral pericardium along 
the right pulmonary veins and inferior 
vena cava.
On the left side: by reflection of visceral pericardium along 
the left pulmonary veins.
Superiorly: 
by reflection of visceral pericardium along 
the right and left superior pulmonary veins.
Inferiorly: 
it is open.
Surgical significance of transverse pericardial sinus: 
During cardiac surgery, after the pericardial sac is opened 
anteriorly, a finger is passed through the transverse sinus 
of pericardium, posterior to the aorta and pulmonary trunk 
(Fig. 20.5).
A temporary ligature is passed through the transverse 
sinus around the aorta and pulmonary trunk. The tubes of 
heart-lung machine are inserted into these vessels and 
ligature is tightened.
Clinical correlation
ARTERIAL SUPPLY
 
 The fibrous pericardium and parietal layer of visceral 
pericardium is supplied by the branches of the following 
arteries:
1. Internal thoracic artery.
2. Musculophrenic arteries.
3. Descending thoracic aorta.
 
 The visceral layer of serous pericardium is supplied by the 
coronary arteries.
NERVE SUPPLY
1. The fibrous pericardium and parietal layer of the serous 
pericardium are supplied by the phrenic nerves (somatic 
nerve fibres).
2. The visceral layer of the serous pericardium is supplied 
by the branches of sympathetic trunks and vagus nerves 
(autonomic nerve fibres). Thus fibrous pericardium and 
parietal layer of the visceral pericardium are sensitive to 
pain whereas visceral layer of pericardium is insensitive 
to pain. Consequently pain of pericarditis originates 
from parietal pericardium.
• Pericarditis and cardiac tamponade: The inflammation 
of the serous pericardium is called pericarditis which 
causes accumulation of serous fluid in the pericardial 
cavity, 
pericardial 
effusion. 
excessive 
accumulation of serous fluid in the pericardial cavity may 
compress the thin-walled atria and interfere with the filling 
of the heart during diastole and consequently the cardiac 
output is diminished. This condition is clinically termed 
cardiac tamponade.
The pericarditis is the terminal event in uremia.
• Pericardiocentesis: Excessive pericardial fluid can be 
aspirated from the pericardial cavity by two routes:
– Sternal approach: The needle is inserted through the 
left 5th or 6th intercostal space immediately adjacent to 
the sternum.
– Subxiphoid approach: The needle is inserted in the left 
costoxiphoid angle and passed in an upward and 
backward direction at an angle of 45° to the skin.
• Pericardial friction rub: The roughening of parietal and 
visceral layers of the serous pericardium by inflammatory 
exudate can cause friction between the two layers called 
pericardial friction rub which can be felt on palpation and 
heard through the stethoscope.
Clinical correlation
Fig. 20.5 Finger passing through the transverse pericardial sinus.
Superior vena
cava
Index finger passing
through transverse sinus
Ascending aorta
Pulmonary trunk
--- Page 275 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
HEART
The heart (syn. Gk. Kardia/Cardia; L. Cor/Cordis) is a hollow 
muscular organ situated in the mediastinum of the thoracic 
cavity, enclosed in the pericardium. It is somewhat pyramidal 
in shape and placed obliquely behind the sternum and 
adjoining parts of costal cartilages so that one-third of the 
heart is to the right of median plane and two-third of the 
heart is to the left of the median plane.
The heart consists of four chambers—right atrium and 
right ventricle, and left atrium and left ventricle. On the 
surface the atria are separated from the ventricles by the 
atrioventricular groove (also called coronary sulcus) and 
ventricles from each other by interventricular grooves.
Shape and Measurements
Shape: Pyramidal or conical.
Measurements: Length = 12 cm.
Width = 9 cm.
Weight = 300 g in males; 250 g in females.
N.B. The heart is slightly larger than one’s own clenched fist.
EXTERNAL FEATURES (Figs 20.6 and 20.7)
The heart presents the following external features:
1. Apex.
2. Base.
3. Three surfaces (sternocostal, diaphragmatic, and left)
4. Four borders (right, left, upper, and inferior).
APEX OF THE HEART
The apex of the heart is a conical area formed by left ventricle. 
It is directed downwards and forwards, and to the left. It lies 
at the level of the 5th left intercostal space, 3.5 inches (9 cm) 
from the midline and just medial to the midclavicular line.
Apex beat: It is the outermost and lowermost thrust of 
the cardiac contraction (during ventricular systole) felt on 
the front of the chest or it is the point of maximum cardiac 
impulse (PMCI). Normally the apex beat is felt as a light 
tap in left 5th intercostal space in the midclavicular line.
In infants, the heart is positioned more horizontally so 
that the apex of the heart lies in third or fourth left intercostal 
space and consequently the apex beat in children up to 7 
years of age is felt in the third or fourth intercostal space just 
lateral to the midclavicular line.
N.B. Normally the apex of the heart is on the left side 
and apex beat is felt on the left side (left 5th intercostal 
space) but sometimes the heart is malpositioned with 
apex on the right side. This condition is called 
dextrocardia. It may be associated with complete 
reversal of thoracic and abdominal viscera, a condition 
called situs inversus.
Clinical correlation
Fig. 20.6 Anterior aspect (sternocostal surface) of the heart. Note that the most of the sternocostal surface is formed by the 
right atrium and the right ventricle.
Left auricle
Left pulmonary veins
Pulmonary trunk
Arch of aorta
Left ventricle
Anterior interventricular
groove
Atrioventricular groove
Right atrium
Right auricle
Right pulmonary veins
Ascending aorta
Superior vena cava
Right ventricle
Atrioventricular groove
Posterior interventricular
groove
Apex
--- Page 276 ---
Pericardium and Heart
BASE OF THE HEART
The base (or posterior surface) of the heart is formed by two 
atria, mainly by the left atrium. Strictly speaking two-third of 
the base is formed by the posterior surface of the left atrium 
and one-third by the posterior surface of the right atrium. It 
is directed backwards and to the right (i.e., opposite to the 
apex).
Characteristic features of the base are as follows:
1. It lies opposite to the apex.
2. It lies in front of the middle four thoracic vertebrae (i.e., 
T5–T8) in the lying-down position and descends one 
vertebra in the erect posture (T6–T9).
3. The base is separated from vertebral column by the 
oblique pericardial sinus, esophagus, and aorta.
N.B. Clinically, base is the upper border of the heart where 
great blood vessels (superior vena cava, ascending aorta, 
and pulmonary trunk) are attached.
SURFACES OF THE HEART
The heart has the following three surfaces:
1. Sternocostal (anterior).
2. Diaphragmatic (inferior).
3. Left surface.
Sternocostal surface: It is formed mainly by the right atrium 
and right ventricle, which are separated from each other by 
the anterior part of atrioventricular groove. The sternocostal 
surface is also partly formed by the left auricle and left 
ventricle. The right ventricle is separated from left ventricle 
by the anterior interventricular groove.
N.B.
• The left atrium is hidden on the front by the ascending 
aorta and pulmonary trunk.
• The part of sternocostal surface is uncovered by the left 
lung (cardiac notch) forming an area of superficial cardiac 
dullness.
Diaphragmatic surface: This surface is flat and rests on the 
central tendon of the diaphragm. It is formed by the left and 
right ventricles which are separated from each other by the 
posterior interventricular groove. The left ventricles form 
left two-third of this surface and right ventricle forms only 
right one-third of this surface.
Left surface: It is formed mainly by the left ventricle and 
partly by the left atrium and auricle. It is directed upwards, 
backwards, and to the left.
BORDERS OF THE HEART
The heart has the following four borders:
1. Right border.
2. Left border.
3. Inferior border.
4. Upper border.
Left pulmonary veins
Left pulmonary artery
Coronary sulcus
Left ventricle
Right ventricle
Right atrium
Left atrium
Right pulmonary veins
Inferior vena cava
Superior vena cava
Posterior interventricular
groove
Apex
Right pulmonary artery
Arch of aorta
Fig. 20.7 Posterior aspect of the heart.
--- Page 277 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
Right border: It is more or less vertical and is formed by the 
right atrium. It extends from the right side of the opening of 
SVC to that of IVC and separates the base from the sternocostal 
surface.
Left border: It is curved and oblique. It is formed mainly by 
the left ventricle and partly by the left auricle. It extends from 
left auricle to the apex of the heart and separates sternocostal 
and left surfaces.
Inferior border: It is nearly horizontal and extends from the 
opening of IVC to the apex of the heart. It is formed by the 
right ventricle. The right atrium also forms a part of this 
border. The inferior border separates the sternocostal surface 
from the diaphragmatic surface. Near the apex it presents a 
notch called incisura apicis cordis.
Upper border: It is slightly oblique and is formed by the right 
and left atria, mainly by the latter. The upper border is 
obscured from the view on the sternocostal surface because 
ascending aorta and pulmonary trunk lie in front of it. On 
the surface of the body it can be marked by a line joining a 
point on the lower border of the 2nd left costal cartilage, 1.5 
in from the median plane to a point on the upper border of 
3rd right costal cartilage, 1 inch away from the median plane.
Cardiac shadow in chest radiograph: In X-ray of chest, 
PA view, the term cardiac-shadow is used for mediastinal 
shadow. The left border of cardiac shadow, from above 
downwards is formed by: aortic arch, pulmonary trunk, left 
auricle and left ventricle. The right border from above 
downwards is formed by SVC and right atrium (Fig. 20.8). 
Clinical correlation
CHAMBERS OF THE HEART
The heart consists of four chambers, viz.
1. Right atrium.
2. Right ventricle.
3. Left atrium.
4. Left ventricle.
The two atrial chambers are separated from each other by 
a vertical septum—the interatrial septum and the two 
ventricular chambers are separated from each other by a 
vertical septum—the interventricular septum.
The right atrium communicates with the right ventricle 
through right atrioventricular orifice, which is guarded by 
three cusps.
The left atrium communicates with the left ventricle 
through the left atrioventricular orifice, which is guarded by 
two cusps.
The walls of the chambers of the heart are made up of 
cardiac muscle—the myocardium, which is covered 
externally by the serous membrane—the epicardium and 
lined internally by endothelium— the endocardium.
The atria are thin walled as compared to the ventricles 
and have little contractile power.
Demarcation of Chambers of the Heart on the Surface
On the surface the chambers of the heart are demarcated or 
delineated by the following three sulci/grooves (Figs 20.6 
and 20.7):
1. Coronary sulcus (atrioventricular groove).
2. Anterior interventricular sulcus.
3. Posterior interventricular sulcus.
Fig. 20.8 X-ray chest PA view; A, actual radiograph; B, tracing of the cardiac shadow (1 = Aortic knuckle, 2 = Pulmonary 
conus, 3 = Left auricle, 4 = Left ventricle, 5 = Superior vena cava, 6 = Right atrium). (Source: A, Fig. 4.1, Page 94, Integrated 
Anatomy, David JA Heylings, Roy AJ Spence, Barry E Kelly. Copyright Elsevier Limited 2007, All rights reserved. B; Fig. 3.19, Page 
137, Clinical and Surgical Anatomy, 2e, Vishram Singh. Copyright Elsevier 2007, All rights reserved.)
L.V.
R.V.
R.A.
P.T.
Aorta
S.V.C.
Clavicle
Tracheal shadow
Left cardiophrenic
angle
Left costo-
diaphragmatic
recess
Left dome
of diaphragm
Right dome
of diaphragm
Right costo-
diaphragmatic
recess
Right
cardiophrenic
angle
--- Page 278 ---
Pericardium and Heart
Coronary sulcus (atrioventricular groove): It encircles the 
heart and separates the atria from the ventricles. It is deficient 
anteriorly due to the root of pulmonary trunk.
The atrioventricular groove is divided into anterior and 
posterior parts.
The anterior part consists of right and left halves.
The right half of the anterior part runs downwards and to 
the right between the right atrium and right ventricle and 
lodges right coronary artery.
The left anterior part of AV groove intervenes between the 
left auricle and left ventricle. It lodges circumflex branch of 
left coronary artery.
The posterior part of AV groove intervenes between the 
base and the diaphragmatic surface of the heart. It lodges 
coronary sinus.
Anterior and posterior interventricular sulci: They separate 
the right and left ventricles. The anterior interventricular 
sulcus is on the sternocostal surface of the heart and lodges 
anterior interventricular artery and great cardiac vein. The 
posterior interventricular groove is on the diaphragmatic 
surface and lodges posterior interventricular artery and 
middle cardiac vein.
N.B. The meeting point of interatrial groove, posterior 
interventricular groove, and posterior part of atrioventricular 
groove is termed crux of the heart.
Circulation of Blood
Functionally, the heart is made up of two muscular pumps—
the right and left (Fig. 20.9). The right pump consists of 
right atrium and right ventricle while the left pump consists 
of left atrium and left ventricle. The right pump is responsible 
for pulmonary circulation and the left pump is responsible 
for systemic circulation as follows:
 
 The right atrium receives deoxygenated blood from the 
whole body through superior and inferior venae cavae. 
The blood flows from right atrium into right ventricle 
through right atrioventricular orifice. The blood is 
prevented from regurgitating back to the atrium by means 
of right atrioventricular valve. The right ventricle contracts 
and propels the blood into the pulmonary trunk, 
pulmonary arteries, and finally into the lung where blood 
is oxygenated (pulmonary circulation).
 
 The left atrium receives the oxygenated blood from lungs 
through four pulmonary veins. The blood from left 
Fig. 20.9 Heart as double pump.
Lung capillaries
O2 taken and
CO2 released
(Pulmonary circulation)
Venous blood
(bluish)
Left atrium
Left ventricle
Right atrium
Right ventricle
Arterial blood
(bright red)
Left pump
Right pump
Tissue capillaries
O2 released and CO2 taken up
(Systemic circulation)
--- Page 279 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
atrium flows into left ventricle through left atrioventricular 
orifice. The blood is prevented from regurgitating back to 
the atrium by means of left atrioventricular valve. The left 
ventricle strongly contracts and propels the blood into the 
ascending aorta and then into the systemic circulation.
N.B. The right ventricle is required to pump the blood 
through a relatively low-resistance vascular bed, whereas 
the left ventricle is required to pump the blood through a 
relatively high resistance peripheral vascular bed.
The muscular wall of the left ventricle is, therefore, much 
thicker than that of the right ventricle.
RIGHT ATRIUM
The right atrium is somewhat quadrilateral chamber situated 
behind and to the right side of the right ventricle. It consists 
of a main cavity and a small outpouching called auricle.
External Features
1. The right atrium is elongated vertically and receives 
superior vena cava (SVC) at its upper end and the 
inferior vena cava (IVC) at its lower end.
2. The upper anterior part is prolonged to the left to form 
the right auricular appendage, the right auricle. The 
margins of the auricle are notched. The right auricle 
overlaps the roots of the ascending aorta completely and 
infundibulum of the right ventricle partly.
3. A shallow vertical groove called sulcus terminalis 
extends along the right border between the superior and 
inferior vena cavae. The upper part of the sulcus contains 
the sinuatrial (SA) node. Internally it corresponds to 
crista terminalis.
4. The vertical right atrioventricular groove lodges the 
right coronary artery and the small cardiac vein.
Internal Features (Fig. 20.10)
The interior of the right atrium is divided into two parts: 
(a) main smooth posterior part – the sinus venarum, and 
(b) rough anterior part – the atrium proper. The two parts 
are separated from each other by crista terminalis. The 
differences between these two parts are enumerated in Table 
20.2. The interior of right atrium also presents septal wall of 
the right atrium.
Septal wall of the right atrium: Developmentally it is derived 
from septum primum and septum secundum. The septal 
wall when viewed from within the right atrium presents the 
following features:
Right atrioventricular orifice
Opening of coronary sinus
Fossa ovalis
Annulus ovalis (limbus fossa ovalis)
Openings of venae cordis minimi
Auricle
Valve of inferior
vena cava
Musculi pectinati
Crista terminalis
Inferior vena cava
Valve of
coronary sinus
Superior vena cava
Fig. 20.10 Interior of the right atrium.
Table 20.2 Differences between the smooth and rough 
parts of the right atrium
Smooth part (sinus venarum)
Rough part (atrium proper)
Developmentally it is derived 
from right horn of the sinus 
venosus
Developmentally it is derived 
from primitive atrium
All the venous channels except 
anterior cardiac veins open into 
this part (e.g., SVC, IVC, 
coronary sinus, and venae 
cordae minimi)
Presents series of transverse 
ridges, the musculi pectinati, 
which arise from the crista 
terminalis and run forwards 
towards the auricle. The 
interior of auricle presents 
reticular sponge-like network 
of the muscular ridges
--- Page 280 ---
Pericardium and Heart
1. Fossa ovalis, a shallow oval/saucer-shaped depression in 
the lower part, formed by septum primum. It represents 
the site of foramen ovale in the foetus.
2. Annulus ovalis/limbus fossa ovalis, forms the distinct 
upper and lateral margin of the fossa ovalis. It represents 
the free edge of the septum secundum. Inferiorly the 
annulus ovalis is continuous with the left end of the 
valve of IVC.
3. Triangle of Koch, a triangular area bounded in front by 
the base of septal leaflet of tricuspid valve, behind by 
anterior margin of the opening of coronary sinus and 
above by the tendon of Todaro—a subendocardial ridge. 
The atrioventricular node lies in this triangle.
4. Torus aorticus, an elevation in the anterosuperior part 
of the septum produced due to bulging of the right 
posterior (non-coronary) sinus of ascending aorta.
The sponge-like interior of right auricle prevents the free 
flow of blood and thus favors the formation of thrombus. The 
thrombi may dislodge during auricular fibrillation and may 
cause pulmonary embolism.
Clinical correlation
Opening into the Right Atrium
There are number of openings in the right atrium. These are 
as follows (Fig. 20.10):
1. Opening of SVC: The SVC opens at the upper end of the 
right atrium and has no valve. It returns the blood to the 
heart from the upper half of the body.
2. Opening of IVC: The IVC opens at the lower end of the 
right atrium close to the interatrial septum. It is guarded 
by a rudimentary non-functioning semilunar valve 
called valve of the inferior vena cava/Eustachian valve.
N.B. During embryonic life, the Eustachian valve guides the 
blood of IVC to the left atrium through foramen ovale. The 
IVC returns the blood to the heart from the lower half of the 
body. A very small projection called intervenous tubercle (of 
Lower) is scarcely visible on the posterior wall of the right 
atrium just below the opening of SVC. During embryonic life 
it directs the blood of SVC to the right ventricle.
3. Opening of coronary sinus: The coronary sinus, which 
drains most of the blood from the heart, opens into the 
right atrium between the openings of IVC and right 
atrioventricular orifice. It is also guarded by a 
rudimentary non-functioning valve, Thebesian valve.
4. Right atrioventricular orifice (largest opening): It 
communicates the right atrial chamber with the right 
ventricular chamber. It lies anterior to the opening of 
IVC and is guarded by the tricuspid valve.
5. Many small orifices of small veins: These are the 
opening of venae cordis minimae (Thebesian veins) and 
anterior cardiac veins.
RIGHT VENTRICLE
The right ventricle is the thick-walled triangular chamber of 
the heart which communicates with the right atrium through 
right atrioventricular orifice and with the pulmonary trunk 
through pulmonary orifice.
External Features
1. It forms the most of sternocostal surface and small part 
of the diaphragmatic surface of the heart. It also forms 
the inferior border.
2. It is separated from the right atrium by a more or less 
vertical anterior part of the coronary sulcus/
atrioventricular groove.
Fig. 20.11 Main features in the interior of right ventricle (AV = atrioventricular).
Right atrial
chamber
Pulmonary value
Anterior cusp
of AV orifice
Septal cusp
of AV orifice
Posterior cusp
of AV orifice
Posterior papillary
muscle
Septal papillary
muscle
Anterior papillary
muscle
Moderator band
Supraventricular crest
Infundibulum
--- Page 281 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
Internal Features (Fig. 20.11)
1. The interior of right ventricle consists of two parts: (a) a 
large, lower rough inflowing part, and (b) a small upper 
outflowing part, the infundibulum. The two parts are 
separated from each other by a muscular ridge, the 
supraventricular crest (infundibuloventricular crest). 
The differences of two parts are enumerated in Table 
20.3.
2. The cavity of right ventricle is flattened by the forward 
bulge of the interventricular septum. In transverse 
section it is crescent shaped (Fig. 20.13).
3. The wall of the right ventricle is thinner than that of the 
left ventricle (ratio 1:3).
Trabeculae Carneae of Right Ventricular Chamber
These are muscular projections which give the ventricular 
chamber a sponge-like appearance.
Types of Trabeculae Carneae
Trabeculae carneae are of three types: (a) ridges (fixed 
elevations), (b) bridges (only ends are fixed, the central part 
is free), and (c) pillars (base is fixed to ventricular wall and 
apex is free).
Papillary muscles
These represent the pillars of trabeculae carneae. The 
papillary muscles project inwards. Their bases are attached 
to the ventricular wall and their apices are connected by 
thread-like fibrous cords (the chordae tendinae) to the cusps 
of the tricuspid valve.
There are three papillary muscles in the right ventricle: 
(a) anterior, (b) posterior (inferior), and (c) septal. The 
anterior is largest, posterior is small, and septal is usually 
divided into two or three nipples. The papillary muscles of 
right ventricle are attached to the cusps of the tricuspid valve.
Moderator band (septomarginal trabeculum)
It is thick muscular ridge extending from ventricular septum 
to the base of the anterior papillary muscle, across the 
ventricular cavity. It conveys the right branch of the 
atrioventricular bundle (bundle of His), a part of conducting 
system of the heart. It prevents the over distension of right 
ventricle.
LEFT ATRIUM
External Features
1. It is a thin-walled quadrangular chamber situated 
posteriorly behind and to the left side of right atrium. It 
forms greater part (left 2/3rd) of the base of the heart.
2. Its upper end is prolonged anteriorly to form the left 
auricle, which overlaps the infundibulum of right 
ventricle.
3. Behind the left atrium lies: (a) oblique sinus of serous 
pericardium and (b) fibrous pericardium, which 
separates it from the esophagus.
Internal Features
1. The interior of left atrium is smooth, but the left auricle 
possesses muscular ridges in the form of reticulum.
2. The anterior wall of left atrial cavity presents fossa 
lunata, which corresponds to the fossa ovalis of the right 
atrium.
Openings in the Left Atrium
Openings in the left atrium are as follows:
1. Openings of four pulmonary veins in its posterior wall, 
two on each side. They have no valves.
2. Number of small openings of venae cordis minimae.
3. Left atrioventricular orifice. It is guarded by the mitral 
valve.
LEFT VENTRICLE
The left ventricle is thick-walled triangular chamber of the 
heart which communicates with the left atrium through left 
atrioventricular orifice and with the ascending aorta through 
aortic orifice. The walls of left ventricle are three times thicker 
than that of the right ventricle.
External Features
The left ventricle forms the (a) apex of the heart, (b) small 
part of the sternocostal surface, (c) most of the (left 2/3rd) 
diaphragmatic surface, and (d) most of the left border of the 
heart.
Table 20.3 Differences of inflowing and outflowing parts of 
the right ventricle
Inflowing lower part
Outflowing upper part
It develops from primitive 
ventricle
It develops from bulbus cordis
It is large in size and lies 
below the supraventricular 
crest
It is small in size and lies above 
the supraventricular crest
It is rough due to presence of 
the muscular ridges—the 
trabeculae carneae. It forms 
most of the right ventricular 
chamber
It is smooth and forms upper 1 
inch conical part of the right 
ventricular chamber—the 
infundibulum, which gives rise 
to pulmonary trunk
--- Page 282 ---
Pericardium and Heart
Anterior papillary
muscle
Aortic orifice
Bicuspid orifice
Posterior papillary
muscle
Pulmonary
orifice
Septal papillary
muscle
Anterior papillary
muscle
Tricuspid orifice
Posterior/Inferior
papillary muscle
Sternocostal surface
Diaphragmatic surface
Fig. 20.12 Main features in the interior of left ventricle.
Ascending aorta
Aortic valve
Left atrial chamber
Anterior cusp
of mitral valve
Posterior cusp
of mitral valve
Posterior papillary
muscle
Anterior papillary
muscle
Aortic vestibule
Fig. 20.13 Transverse section across the ventricles of the heart. Note the difference in the thickness of the wall and shape 
of the right and left ventricular cavities.
Internal Features (Fig. 20.12)
The interior of the left ventricle is divided into two parts: 
(a) a large lower rough inflowing part, and (b) a small upper 
smooth outflowing part—the aortic vestibule.
The differences between these two parts are enumerated 
in Table 20.4.
The cavity of the left ventricle is circular in cross section 
because the interventricular septum bulges into the right 
ventricle.
--- Page 283 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
Table 20.4 Differences between the inflowing and out-
flowing parts of the left ventricle
Inflowing part
Outflowing part
It develops from primitive 
ventricle
It develops from bulbus cordis
It lies below the aortic 
vestibule
It lies between the membranous 
part of the interventricular 
septum and anterior cusp of the 
mitral valve
It is rough due to presence 
of trabeculae carneae and 
forms most of the left 
ventricular chamber
It is smooth and forms smooth 
small upper part—the aortic 
vestibule, which gives rise to the 
ascending aorta
Trabeculae Carneae of Left Ventricle
The trabeculae carneae of the left ventricle are similar to 
those of the right ventricle but are well developed and present 
two large papillary muscles (anterior and posterior) and no 
moderator band. The papillary muscles of the left ventricle 
are attached to the cusps of the mitral valve by chordae 
tendinae.
Openings in the Left Ventricle
The openings in the left ventricle are as follows:
1. Left atrioventricular orifice.
2. Aortic orifice.
The main features as seen in transverse section through 
the ventricles are shown in Fig. 20.13.
The main differences between the right and left ventricle 
are listed in Table 20.5.
VALVES OF THE HEART (Fig. 20.14)
There are two pairs of valves in the heart: (a) a pair of 
atrioventricular valves, and (b) a pair of semilunar valves.
The valves prevent regurgitation of the blood.
ATRIOVENTRICULAR VALVES
The right and left atria communicate with the right and left 
ventricles through right and left atrioventricular orifices, 
respectively. The right and left atrioventricular orifices are 
guarded by the right and left atrioventricular valves 
respectively.
 
 Right atrioventricular valve (also known as tricuspid 
valve): As the name indicates it has three cusps—anterior, 
posterior and septal, which lie against the three walls of 
the ventricle. The tricuspid valve can admit the tips of 
three fingers.
 
 Left atrioventricular valve (also known as bicuspid/
mitral valve). As the name indicates it has two cusps—a 
larger anterior/aortic cusp and a smaller posterior cusp. 
The mitral/bicuspid valve can admit the tips of two 
fingers.
Table 20.5 Differences between the right and left ventricles
Right ventricle
Left ventricle
Receives deoxygenated blood 
from right atrium and pumps 
it to the lungs through 
pulmonary trunk
Receives oxygenated blood 
from left atrium and pumps it 
to the whole body through 
aorta
Wall of right ventricle is 
thinner than that of left 
ventricle (ratio 1:3)
Wall of left ventricle is thicker 
than that of right ventricle 
(ratio 3:1)
Possesses three papillary 
muscles (anterior, posterior, 
and septal)
Possesses two papillary 
muscles (anterior and 
posterior)
Moderator band present
Moderator band absent
Cavity of right ventricle is 
crescentic in shape in cross 
section
Cavity of left ventricle is 
circular in shape in cross 
section
Bicuspid/mitral valve
(Left atrioventricular valve)
Pulmonary valve
Aortic valve
Semilunar
valves
Tricuspid valve
(Right atrioventricular valve)
Fig. 20.14 The valves of the heart.
--- Page 284 ---
Pericardium and Heart
Structure
The atrioventricular valves are made up of two components 
(Fig. 20.15):
1. A fibrous ring.
2. Cusps.
The fibrous rings surround the orifice. The cusps are 
formed by the fold of the endocardium enclosing some 
connective tissue within it. Each cusp has an attached and 
free margin and atrial and ventricular surfaces. The atrial 
surfaces are smooth. The ventricular surfaces and free 
margins are rough and provide attachment to the chordae 
tendinae. As discussed earlier, the chordae tendinae 
connect the apices of papillary muscles with margins and 
ventricular surfaces of the cusps. The chordae tendinae of 
each papillary muscle are attached to the contiguous halves 
of the two cusps.
The valves are closed during ventricular systole. The 
papillary muscles shorten and chordae tendinae are pulled 
upon to prevent the eversion of the cusps of tricuspid valve 
due to increased intraventricular pressure. 
N.B.
• The nutrition to the fibrous ring and basal one-third of 
cusps is provided by the blood vessels.
• The nutrition to the distal two-third of the cusps is 
provided directly by the blood within the chambers of the 
heart.
• The cusps of mitral valve are smaller but thicker than 
those of tricuspid valve.
Role of papillary muscle in acute cardiac failure: The 
papillary muscles prevent the prolapse of atrio-ventricular 
valves into the atria during ventricular systole. The rupture of 
a papillary muscle, following an adjacent myocardial 
infarction, will allow the prolapse of the affected cusp to 
occur into the atrium at each systole. This will consequently 
lead to acute cardiac failure.
Clinical correlation
SEMILUNAR VALVES (Fig. 20.16)
The right and left ventricles pump out blood through 
pulmonary and aortic orifices, respectively. Each of these 
orifices is guarded by three semilunar cusps hence they are 
called semilunar valves. Both aortic and pulmonary valves 
are similar to each other in structure and functions.
Each valve has three cusps which are attached directly 
to the wall of aorta/pulmonary trunk. (Note that they do 
not have fibrous ring similar to tricuspid and mitral 
valves.)
The cusps form small pockets with their mouths directed 
upwards towards the lumen of great vessels. Each cusp has a 
fibrous nodule at the midpoint of its free edge. On each side 
of the nodule the thickened crescentic edge is called lunule, 
which extends up to the base. When the valve is closed, the 
nodules meet in the center.
The cusps of semilunar valves are open and stretched 
during ventricular systole and closed during ventricular 
diastole to prevent regurgitation of the blood into the 
ventricle.
N.B.
• No chordae tendinae or papillary muscles are associated 
with semilunar valves. The attachment of the sides of 
cusps to the atrial wall prevents regurgitation of blood.
• Opposite to the cusps, the roots of pulmonary trunk and 
ascending aorta present three dilatations called sinuses. 
The blood in these sinuses prevents the cusps from 
sticking to the wall of great vessels. The anterior aortic 
sinus gives origin to the right coronary artery and left 
posterior aortic sinus gives origin to the left coronary 
artery.
Positions of Cusps in the Pulmonary and Aortic Valves
The positions of cusps of pulmonary valves are: (a) right 
anterior, (b) left anterior, and (c) posterior.
The positions of cusps of aortic valve are just opposite to 
those of the pulmonary valve. They are: (a) right posterior, 
(b) left posterior, and (c) anterior.
Cusps
Papillary
muscles
Chordae
tendinae
Fibrous ring
Fig. 20.15 Right atrioventricular (tricuspid) valve spread out to show its structure.
--- Page 285 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
The aortic sinuses are also named accordingly, i.e., right 
posterior aortic sinus, left posterior aortic sinus, and anterior 
aortic sinus. The right coronary artery arises from anterior 
aortic sinus and left coronary from left posterior aortic sinus. 
Since no coronary artery arises from right posterior aortic 
sinus, it is referred to by some anatomists as non-coronary 
sinus.
N.B. Embryologically, pulmonary valve has anterior, right 
and left cusps whereas aortic valve has posterior, right and 
left cusps (Fig. 20.17). Thus the left coronary artery arises 
from the left aortic sinus, the right coronary artery from the 
right aortic sinus and no artery arises from the posterior 
aortic sinus (non-coronary sinus).
• Murmurs: The abnormal heart sounds are called 
murmurs. They are produced due to regurgitation of blood 
heard when the valves are either stenosed or when the 
valves are not closed properly (leading to regurgitation).
Clinical correlation
– In aortic and pulmonary stenosis the murmur is heard 
during systole and in insufficiency of these valves they 
are heard during diastole.
– In stenosis of mitral and tricuspid valves, the murmurs 
are heard during diastole and in their insufficiency 
during systole.
• Mitral stenosis (narrowing of mitral orifice): It is most 
common in young age. Usually there is history of rheumatic 
fever in the childhood in these cases. This leads to rise in 
the left atrial pressure and enlargement of left atrium 
which may press on the esophagus.
Clinically features of mitral stenosis will be as follows:
1. Shortness of breath (dyspnea).
2. Dysphagia (difficulty in swallowing).
3. Hoarseness of voice (Ortner’s syndrome).
• Tricuspid stenosis: In tricuspid stenosis blood flow from 
right atrium to right ventricle is reduced. The elevation of 
right atrial pressure leads to systemic venous congestion 
and right heart failure.
• Aortic stenosis: In aortic stenosis there accumulation of 
blood in left ventricle, causing its dilatation and 
hypertrophy. There is low cardiac output which may 
manifest as syncope (fainting) on exertion.
• Pulmonary stenosis: It is almost always congenital, 
usually a part of Fallot’s tetralogy. It leads to hypertrophy 
of right ventricle.
HEART SOUNDS
The two sounds are produced by the heart—the first heart 
sound is produced by the closure of the atrioventricular 
(tricuspid and mitral) valves and the second heart sound is 
produced by the closure of semilunar (aortic and pulmonary) 
valves. These sounds are heard by the clinician by auscultation 
Left coronary artery
Nodule
Right coronary
artery
Lunule
Cusp
Ascending aorta
Nodule
Left coronary artery
Aortic sinus
Cusp
Fig. 20.16 Structure of aortic valve. Note that it consists of three semilunar cusps. Each cusp has a fibrous nodule at the 
midpoint of its free edge. The thickened crescentic edge on each side of nodule is the lunule (L. luna = moon). Inset figure 
on right side shows aortic sinus and origin of coronary artery.
Aortic valve
Left coronary artery
Pulmonary valve
Right coronary
artery
Fig. 20.17 Embryological position of cusps in the pulmonary 
and aortic valves (P = posterior, A = anterior, R = right, L = 
left).
--- Page 286 ---
Pericardium and Heart
with stethoscope. The first and second heart sounds are 
heard as ‘LUB’ and ‘DUB’, respectively.
SURFACE MARKINGS OF THE CARDIAC VALVES 
AND AUSCULTATORY AREAS (Fig. 20.18)
The sounds produced by closure of valves of the heart are 
best heard not directly over the location of valve but at areas 
situated some distance away from the valve in the direction 
of blood flow through them.
The pulmonary, aortic, mitral, and tricuspid valves are 
located posterior to the sternum on an oblique line joining 
the 3rd left costal cartilage to the 6th right costal cartilage.
The position of valves on the surface of the chest and sites 
of their auscultatory areas are given in Table 20.6 and shown 
in Figure 20.19.
N.B. Blood tends to carry the sound in the direction of its 
flow, consequently auscultatory area is located superficial to 
the vessel or chamber through which the blood passes and 
is in direct line with the valve orifice.
Fig. 20.18 Surface projection of cardiac valves and sites of their auscultatory areas (P = pulmonary valve, A = aortic valve, 
T = tricuspid valve, M = mitral valve).
Aortic area
Mitral area
Pulmonary area
Tricuspid area
Tricuspid area
Table 20.6 Surface markings of the cardiac valves and the sites of their auscultatory areas
Valve
Surface marking
Site of auscultator area
Pulmonary valve
A horizontal line (2.5 cm long) behind the medial end left 3rd 
costal cartilage and adjoining part of the sternum
Second left intercostal space near the sternum
Aortic valve
A lightly oblique line (2.5 cm long) behind the left half of the 
sternum opposite the 3rd intercostal space
Second right intercostal space near the sternum
Mitral valve
An oblique line (3 cm long) behind the left half of the 
sternum opposite the left 4th costal cartilage
Left 5th intercostal space 3½ inches (9 cm) from 
midline, i.e., over apex beat
Tricuspid valve
Nearly vertical oblique line (4 cm long) behind the right half 
of the sternum opposite the 4th and 5th intercostal spaces
Right half of the lower end of the body of the 
sternum
--- Page 287 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
SKELETON OF THE HEART (Fig. 20.19)
The so called ‘skeleton of the heart’ is composed of fibrous 
tissue and forms the central support of the heart. It consists 
of fibrous rings that surround the atrioventricular, 
pulmonary, and aortic orifices. These rings provide circular 
form and rigidity to the atrioventricular orifices and roots of 
the aorta and pulmonary trunk. They also provide 
attachment to the valves and prevent dilatation of these 
orifices. The cardiac valves are firmly attached to this 
skeleton. The cardiac skeleton along with membranous part 
of interventricular septum also provides attachments to the 
cardiac muscle fibres.
The fibrous rings around the atrioventricular orifices 
separate the muscle fibres of atria from those of the ventricles, 
but provide attachment to these fibres. Thus there is no 
muscular continuity between the atria and ventricles, except 
for the atria ventricular bundle (bundle of His) of the 
conducting system.
Functional significance:
1. The skeleton of the heart allows cardiac muscle to 
contract against the rigid base.
2. The fibrous rings support the bases of the cusps of the 
valves and prevent the valves from stretching and 
becoming incompetent. The aortic ring is the strongest.
N.B.
• The atrioventricular fibrous rings (AV rings) form the 
figure of ‘8’.
• The large mass of fibrous tissue between AV rings and 
aortic ring is called trigonum fibrosum dextrum. In some 
mammals such as sheep, elephant, etc. a bone—the os 
cordis develops in it.
• The small mass of fibrous tissue between the fibrous rings 
around semilunar valves is called trigonum fibrosum 
sinistrum.
• The tendon of infundibulum binds the posterior surface 
of the infundibulum to the aortic ring.
CONDUCTING SYSTEM OF THE HEART (Fig. 20.20)
COMPONENTS
The conducting system of the heart is made up of specialized 
cardiac muscle fibres (not nervous tissue) and is responsible 
for initiation and conduction of cardiac impulse.
The conducting system of the heart consists of the 
following five components:
1. Sinuatrial node (SA node).
2. Atrioventricular node (AV node).
3. Atrioventricular bundle (of His).
4. Right and left branches of bundle of His.
5. Subendocardial Purkinje fibres.
Sinuatrial node (SA node or node of Keith Flack): It is a 
small horseshoe-shaped mass having specialized myocardial 
fibres, situated in the wall of the right atrium in the upper 
part of sulcus terminalis just below the opening of superior 
vena cava.
Trigonum fibrosum sinistrum
Fibrous ring around
the aortic valve
Trigonum fibrosum
dextrum
Tricuspid valve
Membranous part of
interventricular septum
Tendon of
infundibulum
Fibrous ring around
the pulmonary valve
Mitral valve
Fig. 20.19 Skeleton of the heart.
Fig. 20.20 Conducting system of the heart (SA = sinuatrial, 
AV = atrioventricular).
AV bundle
(of His)
Left branch of
AV bundle
Purkinje
fibers
Right branch of
AV bundle
AV node
SA node
Right
atrium
Moderator band
--- Page 288 ---
Pericardium and Heart
It is known as pacemaker of the heart because it generates 
impulses (about 70/minute) and initiates the contraction of 
cardiac muscle producing heart beat.
Atrioventricular node (AV node/node of Tawara): It is 
smaller than the SA node and is located in the lower part of 
the atrial septum, just above the attachment of septal cusp of 
the tricuspid valve/opening of the coronary sinus. It conducts 
the cardiac impulse to the ventricle by the atrioventricular 
bundle. The AV node is capable of generating impulses at the 
rate of about 60/min. The speed of conduction of cardiac 
impulse (about 0.11 sec) provides sufficient time to the atria 
to empty their blood into the ventricle before ventricles start 
contracting.
Atrioventricular bundle (of His): It begins from AV node, 
crosses the AV ring and runs along the inferior part of the 
membranous part of the interventricular septum where it 
divides into the left and right branches.
N.B. Since the skeleton (fibrous framework) of the heart 
separates the muscles of atria from the muscles of the 
ventricles, the bundle of His is the only means of conducting 
impulses from the atria to the ventricles.
Right and left branches of the bundle (of His): The right 
branch passes down the right side of the interventricular 
septum and then becomes subendocardial on the right side 
of the septum. A large part of it continues in the septomarginal 
trabeculum (moderator band) to reach the anterior papillary 
muscle and anterior wall of the ventricle. Its Purkinje fibres 
then spread out beneath the endocardium.
The left branch descends on the left side of the ventricular 
septum, divides into Purkinje fibres which are distributed to 
the septum and left ventricle.
Purkinje fibres: They are the terminal branches of right and 
left branches of the bundle of His and spread subendocardially 
over the septum and the rest of the ventricular wall.
The conducting system and mode of contraction of 
cardiac muscle is summarized as follows:
The SA node (a spontaneous source of cardiac impulse) 
initiates an impulse which rapidly spreads to the muscle fibres 
of the atria, making them to contract. The AV node picks up 
the cardiac impulse from atria and conducts it through 
atrioventricular bundle and its branches to the papillary 
muscles and the walls of the ventricles. The papillary muscles 
contract first, to tighten the chordae tendinae and then the 
contraction of ventricular muscle occurs.
Arterial Supply of the Conducting System
The whole of the conducting system of the heart is supplied 
by the right coronary artery except a part of the left branch 
of the AV bundle which is supplied by the left coronary 
artery.
Conducting system defects: The defect/damage of 
conducting system causes cardiac arrhythmias.
The SA node is the spontaneous source of generation of 
cardiac impulses. The AV node picks up these impulses 
from atria and sends them to the ventricles through AV 
bundle, the only means through which impulses can spread 
from the atria to ventricles.
If the AV bundle fails to conduct normal impulses, there 
occurs alteration in the rhythmic contraction of the ventricles 
(arrhythmias). If complete bundle block occurs there is 
complete dissociation in the rate of contraction of atria and 
ventricles. The commonest cause of defective conduction 
through AV bundle is atherosclerosis of the coronary arteries 
which leads to diminished blood supply to the conducting 
system.
N.B. The rapid pulse is called tachycardia, the slow 
pulse is called bradycardia whereas irregular pulse is 
called arrhythmia.
Clinical correlation
ARTERIAL SUPPLY OF THE HEART (Fig. 20.21)
The heart is mostly supplied by the two coronary arteries, 
which arise from the ascending aorta immediately above the 
aortic valve.
The coronary arteries and their branches run on the 
surface of heart lying within the subpericardial fibrofatty 
tissue.
N.B.
• Coronary arteries are vasa vasorum of the ascending 
aorta.
• Anatomically coronary arteries are not end-arteries but 
functionally they behave like end-arteries.
RIGHT CORONARY ARTERY
Origin
The right coronary artery arises from the anterior aortic sinus 
of the ascending aorta, immediately above the aortic valve.
Course
After arising from the ascending aorta, the right coronary 
artery first runs forwards between the pulmonary trunk and 
the right auricle, and then it descends almost vertically in the 
right atrioventricular groove (right anterior coronary sulcus) 
up to the junction of the right and the inferior borders of the 
heart. At the inferior border of the heart, it turns posteriorly 
and runs in the posterior atrioventricular groove (right 
posterior coronary sulcus) up to the posterior interventricular
--- Page 290 ---
Pericardium and Heart
2. Circumflex artery: It gives a left marginal artery that 
supplies the left margin of the left ventricle up to the 
apex of the heart.
3. Diagonal artery: It may arise directly from the trunk of 
the left coronary artery.
4. Conus artery: It supplies the pulmonary conus.
5. Atrial branches: They supply the left atrium.
The major branches of the right and left coronary arteries 
are summarized in Table 20.7.
VARIATIONS IN THE CORONARY ARTERIES/
CORONARY DOMINANCE
The origin, course, and distribution of the posterior 
interventricular artery are variable.
In right coronary dominance, the posterior interventricular 
artery is a branch of the right coronary artery. It is found in 
90% of the individuals.
In left coronary dominance, the posterior interventricular 
artery arises from circumflex branch of the left coronary 
artery. It is found in 10% of the individuals.
ANASTOMOSES OF THE CORONARY ARTERIES
Anastomoses exist between the terminal branches of the 
coronary arteries at the arteriolar level (collateral circulation). 
The time factor in occlusion of an artery is very important. If 
occlusion occurs slowly, there is time for the healthy arterioles 
to open up and collateral circulation is established, i.e., the 
anastomoses become functional. But if sudden occlusion of 
one of the large branches (coronary artery) occurs, the 
arterioles do not get time to open up to provide collateral 
circulation.
• Angina pectoris: If the coronary arteries are narrowed, 
the blood supply to the cardiac muscles is reduced. As a 
result, on exertion, the patient feels moderately severe 
pain in the region of left precordium that may last as long 
as 20 minutes. The pain is often referred to the left shoulder 
and medial side of the arm and forearm. 
 In angina pectoris pain occurs on exertion and relieved by 
rest. This is because the coronary arteries are so narrowed 
that the ischemia of cardiac muscle occurs only on 
exertion.
Clinical correlation
• Myocardial infarction (MI): A sudden block of one of the 
larger branches of either coronary artery usually leads to 
myocardial ischemia followed by the myocardial necrosis 
(myocardial infarction). The part of heart suffering from MI 
stops functioning and often causes death. This condition 
is termed heart attack or coronary attack.
 The clinical features of MI are as follows:
1. A sensation of pressure/sinking and pain in the chest 
that lasts longer than 30 minutes.
2. Nausea or vomiting, sweating, shortness of breath, and 
tachycardia.
3. Pain radiates to the medial side of the arm, forearm, 
and hand. Sometimes, it may be referred to jaw or neck.
• Sites of coronary artery occlusion: The three most 
common sites of the coronary artery occlusion are as under:
(a) Anterior interventricular artery/left anterior descending 
(LAD) artery = 40–50%.
(b) Right coronary artery = 30–40%.
(c) Circumflex branch of the left coronary artery = 15–20%.
Note:
– The MI mostly occurs at rest whereas angina occurs on 
exertion.
– Anterior interventricular artery/left anterior descending 
(LAD) artery is most commonly blocked.
• Coronary angiography: The coronary angiography is a 
radiological procedure to visualize the coronary arteries 
after injecting contrast medium in their lumen (Fig. 20.22). 
The coronary angiography is useful in localizing the sites 
of the blocks in the coronary arteries.
• Coronary bypass surgery: The coronary bypass surgery 
has become common in recent times in patients with 
unstable/severe angina due to obstruction of the coronary 
artery. A segment of a vein or an artery is connected to 
the ascending aorta (or to the proximal part of the 
coronary artery) and then to coronary artery distal to the 
obstruction (Fig. 20.23). A coronary bypass graft shunts 
blood from the aorta to coronary artery distal to the 
blockage to increase the circulation.
N.B.
• The great saphenous vein is commonly used for 
grafting because (a) it is easily dissected, (b) it has 
diameter equal to or greater than that of coronary 
artery, and (c) it provides lengthy portions with a 
minimum occurrence of valves or branching.
• The use of left internal mammary artery graft (LIMA 
graft) and radial artery graft (RA graft) have also 
become increasingly common.
• Coronary angioplasty: In this process the cardiologists 
pass a small catheter with a small inflatable balloon 
attached to its tip into the obstructed coronary artery. As the 
catheter reaches the obstruction, the balloon in inflated. As 
a result atherosclerotic plaque is flattened against the 
vessel wall and the vessel is stretched to increase the 
lumen. Consequently the blood flow is increased. 
Sometimes transluminal instruments with rotating blades 
and lasers are used to cut the clot. After the artery is dilated, 
an intravascular stent is introduced to maintain the 
dilatation.
Table 20.7 Major branches of the right and left coronary 
arteries
Right coronary artery
Left coronary artery
Right marginal artery
Anterior interventricular artery
Posterior interventricular artery
Circumflex artery
Sinuatrial nodal artery
Diagonal artery
--- Page 292 ---
Pericardium and Heart
Anterior cardiac
veins
Small cardiac vein
Coronary sinus
Great cardiac vein
Left marginal vein
Oblique vein of
left atrium
Right marginal vein
Middle cardiac vein
Left atrium
Oblique vein of
left atrium
Coronary sinus
Right atrium
Middle cardiac vein
Small cardiac vein
Right marginal vein
Posterior vein
of left ventricle
Great cardiac vein
Great cardiac vein
Left marginal
vein
Left marginal vein
Posterior vein
of left ventricle
Great cardiac vein
Middle cardiac vein
Right marginal
vein
Small cardiac
vein
Coronary sinus
Oblique vein of
left atrium
Fig. 20.24 Veins of the heart: A, anterior view of the heart showing cardiac veins; B, posteroinferior view of the heart showing 
the cardiac veins; C, tributaries of the coronary sinus viewed form the front.
--- Page 293 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
6. Right marginal vein: It accompanies the marginal 
branch of the right coronary artery and joins the small 
cardiac vein or drains directly into the right atrium.
7. Left marginal vein: It accompanies the marginal branch 
of the left coronary artery and drains into the coronary 
sinus.
Anterior cardiac veins: These are series of small veins (3 or 4) 
which run parallel to each other across the surface of right 
ventricle to open into the right atrium.
Venae cordis minimae (Thebesian veins): These are extremely 
small veins in the walls of all the four chambers of the heart. 
They open directly into the respective chambers. They are 
most numerous in the right atrium.
LYMPHATIC DRAINAGE OF THE HEART
The lymphatics of the heart accompany the coronary arteries, 
emerge from the fibrous pericardium along with the 
ascending aorta and pulmonary trunk in the form of two 
trunks. The right trunk drains into brachiocephalic nodes 
and left trunk drains into tracheobronchial nodes (at the 
bifurcation of the aorta).
NERVE SUPPLY OF THE HEART
The heart is supplied by the sympathetic and parasympathetic 
fibres via the superficial and deep cardiac plexuses formed 
by the parasympathetic and sympathetic fibres.
The parasympathetic fibres are derived from vagus 
nerves. They are cardioinhibitory; hence their stimulation 
causes slowing of the heart rate and constriction of the 
coronary arteries.
The sympathetic fibres are derived from upper 3–5 
thoracic spinal segments. They are cardioacceleratory, hence 
their stimulation increase the heart rate and causes the 
dilatation of the coronary arteries. The sympathetic fibres 
also cause dilatation of the coronary arteries.
A brief account of formation and distribution of cardiac 
plexuses is given in the following text.
CARDIAC PLEXUSES
Superficial Cardiac Plexus
The superficial cardiac plexus (Fig. 20.25) lies below the 
arch of aorta in front of the bifurcation of pulmonary trunk, 
just to the right of ligamentum arteriosum. The cardiac 
ganglion (of Wrisberg) lies close to the ligamentum 
arteriosum.
It is formed by the:
(a) superior cervical cardiac branch of left cervical 
sympathetic trunk, and
(b) inferior cervical cardiac branch of left vagus nerve.
Distribution
The superficial cardiac plexus gives branches to (a) deep 
cardiac plexus, (b) right coronary artery, and (c) left anterior 
pulmonary plexus.
Left cervical sympathetic chain
Left vagus nerve
Arch of aorta
Ligamentum arteriosum
Cardiac ganglion
Bifurcation of
pulmonary trunk
Superior cervical cardiac branch
of left cervical sympathetic chain
Inferior cervical cardiac
branch of left vagus nerve
Superficial cardiac
plexus
Fig. 20.25 Superficial cardiac plexus.
--- Page 294 ---
Pericardium and Heart
Deep Cardiac Plexus (Fig. 20.26)
The deep cardiac plexus lies in front of the bifurcation of the 
trachea, behind the arch of the aorta.
It is formed by:
(a) all the cardiac branches derived from three cervical and 
upper 4 or 5 thoracic ganglia of the sympathetic chains 
except the superior cervical cardiac branch of left cervical 
sympathetic chain, and
(b) all the cardiac branches of vagus and recurrent laryngeal 
nerves except the inferior cervical cardiac branch of the 
left vagus nerve.
Distribution
The right and left halves of the plexus distributes branches to 
(a) corresponding coronary arteries and pulmonary plexus, 
and (b) separate branches to the atria.
PAIN AND REFLEX PATHWAYS OF THE HEART
Pain Pathways
The sensations of pain arising due to the ischemia of the 
heart pass through the sympathetic fibres to reach the upper 
five thoracic spinal segments (T1–T5) through cervical and 
thoracic sympathetic ganglia and follow the usual 
somatosensory pathway to the central nervous system. The 
pain fibres pass from thoracic ganglia to the spinal nerves via 
white rami communicantes. The cell bodies of the first order 
sensory neurons are located in the dorsal root ganglia of T1–
T5 spinal nerves. Hence cardiac pain is referred mainly in the 
area of distribution of these nerves, i.e., pectoral region and 
medial aspect of the arm and forearm.
N.B. Sometimes cardiac pain is referred to the neck and 
mandible. It is because of the connection of sympathetic 
fibres with the cervical nerves.
Pathways for Cardiovascular Reflexes
The afferent fibres from heart subserving the cardiovascular 
reflexes pass by the parasympathetic fibres of vagal nerves to 
the reticular formation.
ACTION OF THE HEART
The heart is actually a double muscular pump. The right side 
pumps blood to the lungs and left side pumps blood to all 
the parts of the body. Each pump is made up of an atrium 
and a ventricle.
Fig. 20.26 Deep cardiac plexus: A, parasympathetic contribution; B, sympathetic contribution.
Right vagus 
nerve 
Left vagus 
nerve 
Superficial cardiac plexus 
Superior cervical sympathetic
ganglion
Middle cervical sympathetic
ganglion
Stellate ganglion 
T2 ganglion 
T3 ganglion 
T4 ganglion 
T5 ganglion 
Superior cervical cardiac branch of
left sympathetic chain
Deep cardiac
plexus
Inferior cervical cardiac
branch of left vagus
nerve to superficial
cardiac plexus
Deep cardiac
plexus
--- Page 295 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
Cardiac cycle: The contraction of heart followed by 
relaxation is one cardiac cycle. The contraction of the heart 
is termed systole and relaxation is known as diastole. During 
cardiac cycle series of changes take place as it fills with blood 
and empties the same. Normally the heart beats 70–90 times 
per minute in adults and 130–150 times per minute in the 
newborn baby.
• Tachycardia and bradycardia: The increased heart rate 
(rapid pulse) is called tachycardia and decreased heart 
rate (slow pulse) is called bradycardia.
• Arrhythmia: The irregular heart rate (irregular pulse) is 
called arrhythmia.
Clinical correlation
--- Page 297 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
Answers
1. It is cardiac pain which occurs on exertion due to 
the narrowing of the coronary artery/arteries or 
their major branches. The pain is relieved by 
resting.
2. The afferent pain fibres from heart reach the upper 
four or five thoracic spinal segments through the 
cardiac branches of the sympathetic trunks usually 
on the left side. Pain is referred in the left 
pericardium—T4 and T3 dermatomes and medial 
side of the arm (T2 dermatome) and medial side of 
the forearm (T1 dermatome).
3. Right and left coronary arteries. The right coronary 
artery arises from anterior aortic sinus at the root 
of ascending aorta while left coronary artery arises 
from left posterior aortic sinus at the root of 
ascending aorta.
4. The differences between angina pectoris and 
myocardial infarction are follows:
Angina pectoris
Myocardial infarction (MI) 
(heart attack)
Occurs due to narrowing 
of the coronary artery/
arteries causing myocardial 
ischemia
Occurs due to complete 
block of the coronary 
artery/arteries causing 
myocardial ischemia that 
induces myocardial 
necrosis
Occurs on exertion and is 
relieved on rest
Occurs on rest
Sensation of pressure or 
burning in chest that may 
last as long as 20 minutes
Sensation of pressure or 
burning in the chest that 
lasts longer than 30 
minutes
--- Page 298 ---
Superior Vena Cava, 
Aorta, Pulmonary 
Trunk, and Thymus
CHAPTER
The knowledge of anatomy of superior vena cava, aorta, and 
pulmonary trunk is clinically important because of their 
involvement in various disease processes such as obstruction 
of superior vena cava, aortic aneurysm, pulmonary 
embolism, etc.
SUPERIOR VENA CAVA (Fig. 21.1)
The superior vena cava (SVC) is about 7 cm long and 1.25 cm 
in diameter. It lies in the superior and middle mediastina. Its 
extrapericardial part lies in the superior mediastinum and its 
intrapericardial part lies in the middle mediastinum. It 
collects blood from the upper half of the body (i.e., head and 
neck, upper limbs, thoracic wall, and upper abdomen) and 
drains it into the right atrium. Depending upon the site of 
obstruction, different collateral pathways develop. In 
mediastinal syndrome, the signs of obstruction of superior 
vena cava appear first.
Formation, Course, and Termination
The superior vena cava is formed at the lower border of the 
right 1st costal cartilage by the union of right and left 
brachiocephalic (innominate) veins. It passes vertically 
downwards behind the right border of the sternum and 
pierces the pericardium at the level of the right 2nd costal 
cartilage, and opens/terminates into the upper part of the 
right atrium at the lower border of the right 3rd costal 
cartilage. It has no valves in its lumen because gravity 
facilitates the blood flow in it.
Subdivisions
The superior vena cava is subdivided into the following two 
parts:
1. Extrapericardial part (in superior mediastinum).
2. Intrapericardial part (in middle mediastinum).
Relations (Figs 21.1B and 21.2)
Anterior:
1. Right internal thoracic vessels.
2. Margin of right lung and pleura.
3. Chest wall
Posterior:
1. Trachea (posteromedial).
2. Right pulmonary artery and right bronchus.
To the left:
1. Ascending aorta (anteromedial).
2. Brachiocephalic artery.
To the right: 
1. Right phrenic nerve and pericardiophrenic 
vessels.
2. Right lung and pleura.
Tributaries
1. Right and left brachiocephalic veins.
2. Azygos vein, which arches over the root of the right lung 
and opens into SVC just before it pierces fibrous 
pericardium.
3. Mediastinal and pericardial veins.
Brachiocephalic Veins
There are two brachiocephalic veins: (a) right and (b) left. 
Each of them is formed behind the sternoclavicular joint by 
the union of corresponding internal jugular and subclavian 
veins. They unite to form SVC. Both are devoid of valves. 
Differences between the right and left brachiocephalic veins 
are enumerated in Table 21.1.
--- Page 299 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
Azygos vein
Superior vena cava
Right
atrium
Right brachiocephalic vein
Right subclavian vein
Left subclavian vein
Left brachiocephalic vein
Right internal jugular vein
Left internal jugular vein
Clavicle
Pericardiophrenic
artery
Left internal thoracic
artery
Left phrenic nerve
Left vagus nerve
Right and left recurrent
laryngeal nerves
Right vagus nerve
Right phrenic nerve
Right internal
thoracic artery
Fig. 21.1 Superior vena cava: A, formation, course, and termination; B, relations (CC = costal cartilage).
Table 21.1 Differences between right and left brachiocephalic veins
Right brachiocephalic vein
Left brachiocephalic vein
Length
• Short (2.5 cm)
• Long (6 cm)
Course
• Vertical (runs vertically downwards from right 
sternoclavicular joint to the lower margin of the right 
1st costal cartilage)
• Oblique (runs obliquely across the superior 
mediastinum from left sternoclavicular joint to the 
lower margin of the right 1st costal cartilage)
Tributaries
• Right vertebral vein
• Right internal thoracic vein
• Right inferior thyroid vein
• First right posterior intercostal vein
• Left vertebral vein
• Left internal thoracic vein
• Left inferior thyroid vein
• First left posterior intercostal vein
• Left superior intercostal vein
--- Page 300 ---
Superior Vena Cava, Aorta, Pulmonary Trunk, and Thymus
Obstruction of SVC and development of collateral 
pathways:
The SVC may be obstructed (compressed) at two sites: 
(a) above the opening of azygos vein (i.e., in superior 
mediastinum), and (b) below the opening of azygos vein 
(i.e., in the middle mediastinum).
• If SVC is obstructed above the opening of azygos vein, 
the venous blood from the upper half of the body is 
shunted to right atrium through azygos vein. The main 
collateral pathways are provided by the superior intercostal 
veins. The superficial veins of chest wall do not receive 
sufficient blood to cause their prominence. If at all they 
become prominent, the prominence is limited up to the 
costal margin only (Fig. 21.3).
• If SVC is obstructed below the opening of the azygos 
vein, the venous blood from the upper half of the body is 
returned to the right atrium through inferior vena cava 
through the collateral pathways, formed between the 
tributaries of superior and inferior vena cavae (caval–
caval shunt). Clinically in this condition, a subcutaneous 
anastomotic channel between the superficial epigastric 
vein and lateral thoracic vein (thoraco-epigastric vein) is 
seen on the anterior aspect of the thoraco-abdominal wall 
(Fig. 20.3).
Clinical correlation
AORTA
The aorta is the largest artery (arterial trunk) of the body 
which carries the oxygenated blood from the left ventricle 
and distributes it to all the parts of the body.
Parts of the Aorta (Fig. 21.4)
For the convenience of description, the aorta is divided into 
the following four parts:
1. Ascending aorta.
Chest wall 
Ascending
aorta
Right internal
thoracic vessels
Margin of right
lung and pleura
Right phrenic nerve
Pericardiophrenic
vessels
Right pulmonary
artery
Right bronchus 
Trachea 
Superior vena cava
Fig. 21.2 Relations of superior vena cava as seen in the cross section of the thorax.
Fig. 21.3 Prominence veins on the front of trunk in 
obstruction of superior vena cava; A, obstruction above the 
opening of azygos vein; B, obstruction below the opening 
of azygos vein.
Thoraco-epigastric
vein
Prominence of vein
Fig. 21.4 Parts of the thoracic aorta.
Descending
thoracic aorta (3)
Abdominal aorta (4)
Arch of aorta (2)
Diaphragm
Pericardium
Ascending
aorta (1)
Sternal
angle
--- Page 301 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
2. Arch of aorta.
3. Descending thoracic aorta.
4. Abdominal aorta.
N.B. The first three parts are confined to the thoracic cavity 
and together form the thoracic aorta.
ASCENDING AORTA
Origin and Course
1. Ascending aorta arises from the upper end of the left 
ventricle (i.e., aortic vestibule) and continues as an arch 
of aorta at the sternal angle.
2. It is about 5 cm long and its diameter is about 3 cm. It is 
completely enclosed in the pericardium. It begins behind 
the left half of the sternum at the level of the lower 
border of left 3rd costal cartilage, runs upwards, forwards 
and to the right to continue as the arch of aorta at the 
level of sternal angle.
Aortic Sinuses (Sinuses of the Valsalva)
The root of aorta presents three dilatations called aortic 
sinuses of Valsalva (Fig. 21.5). These dilatations are just above 
the cusps of the aortic valve. These positions are: anterior, 
left posterior, and right posterior.
 
 Anterior aortic sinus gives origin to the right coronary 
artery, hence it is also called right coronary sinus.
 
 Left posterior aortic sinus gives origin to the left coronary 
artery, hence it is also called left coronary sinus.
 
 Right posterior aortic sinus is termed non-coronary 
sinus.
Aortic bulb (Fig. 21.5) is a bulge in the right wall of the 
ascending aorta at its union with the arch of the aorta.
Relations
Anterior: From below upwards these are as follows:
1. Infundibulum of right ventricle.
2. Pulmonary trunk.
3. Pericardium.
Posterior: From before backwards and to right these are as 
follows:
1. Transverse sinus of pericardium.
2. Right pulmonary artery.
3. Right principal bronchus.
(a) To the right:
 
(i) Right atrium.
 
(ii) Superior vena cava.
(b) To the left:
 
(i) Left atrium.
 
(ii) Pulmonary trunk.
Branches
1. Right coronary artery from anterior aortic sinus.
2. Left coronary artery from left posterior aortic sinus.
Development
The ascending aorta develops from the truncus arteriosus 
after its partition by the spiral septum.
Aneurysm of ascending aorta: It occurs at the bulb of the 
ascending aorta. The bulb of aorta is a dilatation in the right 
wall of ascending aorta which is subjected to constant thrust 
of the forceful blood current ejected from the left ventricle. It 
may compress the right atrium, SVC or right principal 
bronchus. Its rupture (a serious complication) leads to 
accumulation 
blood 
pericardial 
cavity 
(hemopericardium).
Clinical correlation
ARCH OF AORTA
The arch of aorta is the continuation of ascending aorta at 
the level of sternal angle and continues as descending 
thoracic aorta at the level of sternal angle. Thus it (both) 
begins as well as terminates at the level of sternal angle. It is 
situated in the superior mediastinum. At the beginning the 
arch is anteriorly located while its termination is posteriorly 
located, very close to the left side of T4 vertebra. The 
summit of arch reaches the level of middle of manubrium 
sterni.
Course
The arch of aorta begins at the level of the right 2nd costal 
cartilage and runs upwards, backwards, and to the left, in 
front of the bifurcation of the trachea. Having reached the 
back of the middle of the manubrium, it turns backwards 
and downwards behind the left bronchus up to the level of 
lower border of T4 vertebra where it continues as the 
descending thoracic aorta.
Arch of aorta
Aortic sinuses
Aortic bulb
Fig. 21.5 Ascending aorta showing aortic sinuses (sinuses 
of the Valsalva) and aortic bulb.
--- Page 302 ---
Superior Vena Cava, Aorta, Pulmonary Trunk, and Thymus
N.B.
• The arch of aorta arches over the root of left lung.
• It begins and ends at the same level, i.e., at sternal angle.
• It begins anteriorly and ends posteriorly.
Relations (Figs 21.6 and 21.7)
Posterior and to the right: 
1. Trachea.
2. Esophagus.
3. Left recurrent laryngeal nerve.
4. Thoracic duct.
5. Vertebral column.
Anterior and to the left: 
1. Left lung and pleura.
2. Left phrenic nerve.
3. Left vagus nerve.
4. Left cardiac nerves (i.e., superior 
cervical cardiac branch of left 
sympathetic chain and inferior 
cardiac branch of left vagus nerve).
5. Left superior intercostal vein.
Inferior: 
1. Left bronchus.
2. Bifurcation of pulmonary trunk.
3. Ligamentum arteriosum.
4. Left recurrent laryngeal nerve.
5. Superficial cardiac plexus.
Superior: 
1. Brachiocephalic trunk.
2. Left common carotid artery.
3. Left subclavian artery.
4. Left brachiocephalic vein.
5. Thymus.
N.B. Arch of aorta is related for 5 structures on each aspect.
Branches
1. Brachiocephalic (innominate) artery.
2. Left common carotid artery.
3. Left subclavian artery.
N.B. Occasionally a fourth branch called thyroidea ima 
artery may arise from the arch of aorta.
Esophagus (2)
Thoracic duct (4)
Root of left lung
Trachea (1)
Left recurrent
laryngeal nerve (3)
Left bronchus (1)
Bifurcation of
pulmonary trunk (2)
Left recurrent
laryngeal nerve (4)
Superficial cardiac
plexus (5)
Ligamentum
arteriosum (3) 
Left cardiac
nerves (4)
Left superior
intercostal vein (5)
Left vagus nerve (3)
Root of left lung
Left phrenic
nerve (2)
Left common
carotid artery (2)
Left subclavian
artery (3)
Left brachiocephalic
vein (4)
Brachiocephalic
trunk (1)
Fig. 21.6 Relations of the arch of aorta: A, posterior and to the right (vertebral column (5) is not shown); B, anterior and to 
the left (left lung and pleura (1) are not shown); C, inferior; D, superior (thymus (5) is not shown).
--- Page 303 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
Development
The arch of aorta develops from the following sources:
1. Aortic sac.
2. Left horn of aortic sac.
3. Left fourth aortic arch artery.
Left dorsal aorta (between the attachment of the fourth 
aortic arch (artery) and 7th cervical intersegmental artery.
• Aortic knuckle: In X-ray chest (PA view), the shadow of 
arch of aorta appears as small bulb-like projection at the 
upper end of the left margin of the cardiac shadow called 
aortic knuckle. The aortic knuckle may become prominent 
in old age due to undue folding of the arch caused by 
atherosclerosis.
• Coarctation of aorta (Fig. 21.8): It is congenital narrowing 
of the aorta just proximal or distal to the entrance of the 
ductus arteriosus. Accordingly it is termed preductal type 
and postductal type of coarctation of aorta, respectively. It 
probably occurs due to hyperinvolution of the ductus 
arteriosus. The ductus arteriosus is usually obliterated to 
form ligamentum arteriosum in postductal type of 
coarctation of aorta. The collateral circulation develops 
between the branches of the subclavian arteries and 
those of descending aorta.
Clinical features:
1. There is difference in the blood pressure of the 
upper and lower limbs (i.e., high blood pressure in 
upper limbs and low unrecordable blood pressure in the 
lower limbs).
2. Notching of the lower borders of the ribs due to 
dilatation of engorged posterior intercostal arteries.
3. Pulsating scapulae.
Clinical correlation
• Patent ductus arteriosus (Fig. 21.9): In foetal life, 
pulmonary trunk is connected to the arch of aorta (just 
distal to the origin of left subclavian artery) by short 
wide channel called ductus arteriosus. Normally, after 
birth, it closes functionally within a week and 
anatomically within 4 to 12 weeks. The obliterated 
ductus arteriosus is called ligamentum arteriosum. 
Non-obliterated ductus arteriosus is called patent 
ductus arteriosus.
• Aneurysm of the arch of aorta: It is the localized 
dilatation of the arch and causes compression of 
neighboring structures in the superior mediastinum 
producing mediastinal syndrome. The characteristic 
clinical sign in this condition is ‘tracheal-tug’ which is a 
feeling of tugging sensation in the suprasternal notch.
DESCENDING THORACIC AORTA
The descending thoracic aorta is the continuation of the arch 
of the aorta in the posterior mediastinum.
Course
It begins on the left side of the lower border of the fourth 
thoracic (T4) vertebra and descends in the posterior 
mediastinum with an inclination towards the right. As a 
result it terminates in front of the lower border of the body 
of 12th thoracic (T12) vertebra.
At its lower end it passes through the aortic opening of 
the diaphragm to continue as the abdominal aorta.
Relations
Anterior: From above downwards it is related to:
1. Left lung root.
Thymus
Right lung and pleura
Right phrenic nerve
Trachea
Right vagus nerve
Esophagus
Vertebra
ARCH
Left lung and pleura
Left phrenic nerve
Left vagus nerve
Left superior intercostal vein
Left recurrent laryngeal nerve
Thoracic duct
Cardiac branches of sympathetic
chain and vagus nerve
Sternum
Fig. 21.7 Cross section of superior mediastinum showing relations of arch of aorta (SVC = superior vena cava).
--- Page 305 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
3. Two left bronchial arteries (upper and lower).
4. Esophageal branches, supplying middle one-third of the 
esophagus.
Dissecting aneurysm: In this condition the blood from 
aortic lumen enters into its wall through a tear in the tunica 
intima creating a channel of blood in the tunica media which 
leads to dilatation of the aorta. Clinically, it presents as pain 
in the back due to compression of intercostal nerves. 
Occasionally, the aorta may rupture into the left pleural 
cavity.
Clinical correlation
PULMONARY TRUNK
Origin
The pulmonary trunk is about 5 cm long and arises from the 
upper part (infundibulum) of the right ventricle at the level 
of the sternal end of left 3rd costal cartilage.
Course
After arising from infundibulum in the middle mediastinum, 
it passes backwards and to the left and terminates below the 
arch of aorta and in front of left principal bronchus by 
dividing into right and left pulmonary arteries.
Relations
Anterior:
1. Sternal end of left 2nd intercostal space.
2. Left lung and pleura.
Posterior:
1. Ascending aorta.
2. Commence of left coronary artery.
3. Transverse sinus of pericardium.
To the right:
1. Ascending aorta.
2. Origin of right coronary artery.
3. Right auricle.
To the left:
1. Left coronary artery.
2. Left auricle.
Branches
Right and left pulmonary arteries.
N.B. The right pulmonary artery is larger than the left and 
lies slightly at a lower level. 
• Pulmonary artery catheterization: Various aspects of 
cardiopulmonary 
functions 
monitored 
cardiologists by pulmonary artery catheterization.
The catheter is passed successively as follows:
Internal jugular vein/subclavian vein → Right atrium → 
Right ventricle → Pulmonary trunk → Pulmonary artery.
• Sudden occlusion of pulmonary trunk by an embolus 
may be a sequel to the thrombosis of deep veins of the 
calf (viz. femoral vein) or large pelvic vein following 
operation or immobilization in the sick-bed. When the 
block is complete, death ensues rapidly.
Clinical correlation
THYMUS
The thymus is a bilobed lymphoid organ situated in the 
superior mediastinum and often extends above in the root of 
neck and below in the upper part of anterior mediastinum. It 
is usually prominent in children and gradually increases in 
size till puberty, when it weighs about 40 g. Thereafter it 
atrophies and gets infiltrated by fibrous and fatty tissue. It is 
related anteriorly to sternohyoid and sternothyroid muscles, 
and sternum; and posteriorly to pericardium, arch of aorta 
and its branches, left brachiocephalic vein and trachea. It 
secretes a hormone called thymosin which plays an 
important role in the development of the immunity of the 
body.
--- Page 306 ---
Superior Vena Cava, Aorta, Pulmonary Trunk, and Thymus
Golden Facts to Remember
  Largest artery of the body
Aorta
  Bulb of aorta
Dilatation in the right wall of ascending aorta at its 
union with the arch of aorta
  Largest branch of the arch of aorta
Brachiocephalic trunk
  Commonest variation in the origin of great 
arteries from the arch of aorta
Origin of left common carotid artery from the 
brachiocephalic trunk
  Aortic knuckle
Projection at the upper end of the left margin of the 
cardiac shadow in PA view of X-ray chest
  Part of aorta mostly affected by dissecting 
aneurysm
Descending thoracic aorta
  Smallest part of the aorta
Ascending aorta
  Sinuses of Valsalva
Three dilatations in the ascending aorta above the 
semilunar valves
A mother took her 12-year-old son to the hospital and 
complained that he feels weakness even after slight 
exertion (reduced exercise tolerance), leg cramps on 
walking and shortness of the breath. On examination, 
the doctors noticed radiofemoral delay. Blood pressure 
was 126/20 mmHg in upper limbs and 80/60 mmHg in 
the lower limbs. The X-ray chest showed notching of 
the lower borders of the ribs. Clinically he was 
diagnosed as a case of coarctation of aorta, which was 
confirmed later by echocardiography.
Questions
1. What is coarctation of aorta?
2. Why there is delay in radiofemoral pulse?
3. What is the cause of high blood pressure in the 
upper limbs and low blood pressure in the lower 
limbs?
4. Mention the reason for notching of the ribs.
Answers
1. It is congenital stenosis of the arch of aorta, usually 
distal to the origin of left subclavian artery.
2. Because subclavian arteries supplying upper limbs 
arise proximal to the site of stenosis, whereas 
femoral arteries supplying lower limbs arise from 
aorta distal to the site of obstruction.
3. Answer is same as that of question no. 2.
4. Due to dilatation and tortuosity of the posterior 
intercostal arteries which erode the costal groove of 
the ribs.
Clinical Case Study
--- Page 307 ---
Trachea and Es ophagus
CHAPTER
TRACHEA
The trachea (syn. windpipe; Fig. 22.1) is a flexible 
fibrocartilaginous tube forming the beginning of the lower 
respiratory tract. Its lumen is kept patent by 16–20 C-shaped 
rings of hyaline cartilage. The gap between the posterior free 
ends of C-shaped cartilages is bridged by a band of smooth 
muscle (trachealis) and a fibroelastic ligament, which permit 
expansion of esophagus during the passage of bolus of food.
The arrangement of cartilages and elastic tissue in the 
tracheal wall prevents its kinking and obstruction during the 
movements of the head and neck.
LOCATION
The trachea extends from the lower border of cricoid 
cartilage (corresponding to the lower border of C6 vertebra) 
in the neck to the lower border of T4 vertebra in the thorax. 
Thus upper half of the trachea is located in the neck (cervical 
part) and lower half in the superior mediastinum (thoracic 
part).
N.B. The extent of trachea varies as follows:
• C6 to T4 in cadaver placed in supine position.
• C6 to T6 in living individuals in standing position.
• C6 to T3 in newborn.
DIMENSIONS
Length: 10–12 cm.
External diameter: 2 cm in males and 1.5 cm in females.
Internal diameter: 12 mm in adult, 3 mm in newborn.
Lumen of trachea:
1. The lumen of trachea is smaller in living human beings 
than in the cadavers.
2. It is 3 mm at 1 year of age; during childhood it 
corresponds to the age in years (i.e., 5-year-old child will 
have tracheal diameter of 5 mm) with a maximum of 
10–15 cm 
Left principal bronchus 
Trachea 
Thyroid 
cartilage 
Cricoid cartilage
Right principal 
bronchus 
Fig. 22.1 Trachea.
12 mm in adults. For this reason endotracheal tubes are 
graduated in mm.
COURSE
The trachea is the continuation of the larynx and begins at 
the lower border of the cricoid cartilage at the level of C6 
vertebra, about 5 cm above the jugular notch.
It enters the thoracic inlet in the midline and passes 
downwards and backwards behind the manubrium to 
terminate by bifurcating into two principal bronchi, a little 
to the right side at the lower border of T4 vertebra 
corresponding to the sternal angle.
--- Page 309 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
2. Submucosa: It consists of loose areolar tissue containing 
large number of serous and mucous glands.
3. Cartilage and smooth muscle layer: It is made up of 
horseshoe-shaped (C-shaped) hyaline cartilaginous 
rings, which are deficient posteriorly. The posterior gap 
is filled chiefly by the smooth muscle (trachealis) and 
fibroelastic fibres.
4. Perichondrium: It encloses the cartilage.
5. Fibrous membrane: It is a layer of dense connective 
tissue, containing neurovascular structure.
N.B. There is no clear demarcation between lamina propria 
and submucosa.
VASCULAR SUPPLY AND LYMPHATIC DRAINAGE
 
 Blood supply to the trachea is by inferior thyroid arteries.
 
 Venous drainage of the trachea occurs into the left 
brachiocephalic (innominate) vein.
 
 Lymphatic drainage of the trachea is into pretracheal and 
paratracheal lymph nodes.
NERVE SUPPLY
Nerve supply occurs by the autonomic nerve fibres:
 
 Parasympathetic fibres are sensory and secretomotor to 
the mucous membrane, and motor to the trachealis muscle.
 
 Sympathetic fibres are vasomotor.
• Tracheal shadow in radiograph: It is seen as a vertical 
translucent shadow in front of cervico-thoracic spine. The 
translucency is due to the presence of air in the trachea.
Clinical correlation
• Palpation of trachea: Clinically, trachea is palpated in the 
suprasternal notch. Normally, it is median in position but 
appreciable shift of trachea to right or left side indicates 
the mediastinal shift.
• Importance of carina: It is a keel-like median ridge in the 
lumen at the bifurcation of trachea. The lowest tracheal ring 
at the bifurcation of trachea is thick in its central part. From 
the lower margin of this thick central part a keel-shaped 
(hook-shaped) process projects downwards and backwards 
between the right and left principal bronchi. It has both 
functional and pathological importance.
– Functional importance: The mucosa of trachea over the 
carina is most sensitive. The cough reflex is usually 
initiated here, which helps to clear the sputum.
– Pathological signifi cance: It is visible as a sharp sagittal 
ridge at the tracheal bifurcation during bronchoscopy, 
hence serves as a useful landmark. It is located about 
25 cm from the incisor teeth and 30 cm from the nostrils. 
If the tracheobronchial lymph nodes in the angle 
between the main (principal) bronchi are enlarged due 
to spread of bronchiogenic carcinoma, the carina 
becomes distorted and flattened.
• Importance of mucous secretion in tracheal lumen: It 
helps to trap the inhaled foreign particles and solid 
mucous is then expelled during coughing. The cilia of 
lining epithelium of mucous membrane also beat upwards 
pushing the mucous upwards. The fi broelastic ligament 
prevents overdistension of tracheal lumen while trachealis 
muscle reduces the diameter on contraction during 
coughing which involves increased velocity of expired air 
required for cleaning the air passages.
ESOPHAGUS
The esophagus (Fig. 22.5) is a narrow muscular tube 
extending from pharynx to the stomach. It is about 25 cm 
long and provides passage for chewed food (bolus) and 
Pseudostratified ciliated
columnar epithelium
Pseudostratified
ciliated columnar
epithelium
Lamina propria
Lamina propria
Tracheal (mixed serous
and mucous) glands
Perichondrium
Hyaline cartilage
(C-shaped)
Tracheal (mixed serous
and mucous) glands
Perichondrium
Hyaline cartilage
Fig. 22.4 Microscopic structure of trachea (L/P = low power, H/P = high power). (Source: Box 16.2, Page 349, Textbook of 
Histology and a Practical Guide, 2e, JP Gunasegaran. Copyright Elsevier 2010, All rights reserved.)
--- Page 310 ---
Trachea and Es ophagus
liquids during the third stage of deglutition. The anatomy of 
esophagus is clinically important because of its involvement 
in various diseases such as esophagitis, esophageal varices 
and cancer. It begins with lower part of the neck and 
terminates in the upper part of the abdomen by joining the 
upper end of the stomach.
DIMENSIONS AND LUMEN
Length: 25 cm (10 inches).
Width: 2 cm.
Lumen: It is flattened anteroposteriorly. Normally it is kept 
closed (collapsed) and opens (dilates) only during the 
passage of the food.
COURSE
The esophagus begins in the neck at the lower border of the 
cricoid cartilage (at the lower border of C6 vertebra), 
descends in front of the vertebral column passes through 
superior and posterior mediastina, pierces diaphragm at the 
level of T10 vertebra and ends in the abdomen at the cardiac 
orifice of the stomach at the level of T11 vertebra (Fig. 22.5).
CURVATURES
The cervical portion of esophagus commences in the 
midline, then inclines slightly to the left of the midline at the 
root of neck, enters the thoracic inlet, passes through 
superior mediastinum. At the level of T5 vertebra, it returns 
to the midline, but at T7 it again deviates to the left and 
inclines forwards to pass in front of the descending thoracic 
aorta and pierces diaphragm 2.5 cm to the left of the midline 
(a thumb’s breadth from the side of sternum), at the level of 
7th left costal cartilage. Here fibres of the right crus of 
diaphragm sweep around the esophageal opening forming a 
sling around the esophagus. It enters the abdomen to join 
the stomach at the level of T11 vertebra. Thus esophagus 
presents the following curvatures:
1. Two side-to-side curvatures, both towards the left.
(a) First at the root of the neck, before entering the 
thoracic inlet.
(b) Second at the level of T7 vertebra, before passing in 
front of the descending thoracic aorta.
2. Two anteroposterior curvatures.
(a) First corresponding to the curvature of cervical 
spine.
(b) Second corresponding to the curvature of thoracic 
spine.
CONSTRICTIONS
Normally, there are four sites of anatomical constrictions/
narrowings in the esophagus. The distance of each 
Cardiac orifice
Muscular sling formed by
right crus of diaphragm
Pharyngo-esophageal
junction
Cricopharyngeus
Pharynx
Cervical part 
(4 cm)
Thoracic part (20 cm)
Abd. part
(1−2 cm)
25 cm
Fig. 22.5 Esophagus (Abd.= abdominal).
11 in
(27 cm)
15 in
(40 cm)
9 in
(22 cm)
6 in
(15 cm)
4. Esophageal
 
hiatus in
 
diaphragm
3. Left bronchus
2. Arch of aorta
1. Cricopharyngeus
Upper incisor teeth
Fig. 22.6 Anatomical sites of constrictions in esophagus. 
On the right side distances of these sites from the upper 
incisor teeth are given.
--- Page 311 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
constriction is measured from the upper incisor teeth. The 
constrictions are as follows (Fig. 22.6):
1. First constriction, at the pharyngo-esophageal junction, 
9 cm (6 inches) from the incisor teeth.
2. Second constriction, where it is crossed by the arch of 
aorta, 22.5 cm (9 inches) from the incisor teeth.
3. Third constriction, where it is crossed by the left 
principal bronchus, 27.5 cm (11 inches) from the incisor 
teeth.
4. Fourth constriction, where it pierces the diaphragm, 
40 cm (15 inches) from the incisor teeth.
The sites of constriction, their respective distances from 
the upper incisor teeth and their vertebral level are given in 
Table 22.1.
N.B. The narrowest part of esophagus is its commencement 
at the cricopharyngeal sphincter.
Clinical significance of esophageal constrictions: The 
anatomical constrictions of esophagus are of considerable 
clinical importance due to the following reasons:
1. These are the sites where swallowed foreign bodies may 
stuck in the esophagus.
2. These are the sites where strictures develop after 
ingestion of caustic substances.
3. These sites have predilection for the carcinoma of the 
esophagus.
4. These are sites through which it may be difficult to pass 
esophagoscope/gastric tube (Fig. 22.7).
Clinical correlation
PARTS OF THE ESOPHAGUS
The esophagus is divided into the following three parts:
1. Cervical part (4 cm in length).
2. Thoracic part (20 cm in length).
3. Abdominal part (1–2 cm in length).
The cervical part extends from the lower border of cricoid 
cartilage to the superior border of manubrium sterni 
(described in detail in the Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck 
and Brain, Vol. III by Vishram Singh.
The thoracic part extends from superior border of 
manubrium sterni to the esophageal opening in the 
diaphragm.
Diaphragmatic
constriction
(15"/40 cm)
Bronchial constriction
(11"/27 cm) 
Aortic constriction
(9"/22 cm) 
Cervical constriction
(6"/15 cm) 
Gastric tube
Table 22.1 Sites of constriction in the esophagus
Site of constriction
Vertebral level
Distance from upper 
incisor teeth
At the pharyngo-
esophageal junction 
(cervical 
constriction)
6 inches (15 cm)
At crossing of arch 
of aorta (aortic 
constriction)
9 inches (22 cm)
At crossing of left 
principal bronchus 
(bronchial 
constriction)
11 inches (27 cm)
At the opening in the 
diaphragm 
(diaphragmatic 
constriction)
15 inches (40 cm)
Fig. 22.7 Anatomical sites of the esophageal constrictions 
and passage of the gastric tube.
--- Page 312 ---
Trachea and Es ophagus
The abdominal part extends form esophageal opening in 
the diaphragm to the cardiac end of the stomach.
RELATIONS (Figs 22.8 and 22.9)
RELATION OF CERVICAL PART OF THE ESOPHAGUS
For description refer to the Textbook of Anatomy: Head, 
Neck and Brain, Vol III by Vishram Singh, page 181.
RELATIONS OF THORACIC PART OF THE ESOPHAGUS
Anterior: From above downwards these are as follows:
1. Trachea.
2. Arch of aorta.
3. Right pulmonary artery.
4. Left principal bronchus.
5. Left atrium enclosed in the pericardium.
6. Diaphragm.
Esophagus
Left recurrent
laryngeal nerve
Thoracic duct
Left subclavian artery
Left vagus nerve
Arch of aorta
Left pulmonary
artery
Thoracic aorta
Muscular sling
formed by right
crus of diaphragm
Stomach
Outline of
pericardium
Azygos vein
Right pulmonary
artery
Right vagus
nerve
Right recurrent
laryngeal nerve
Left vagus nerve
Descending
thoracic aorta
Hemiazygos
vein
Esophagus
Right vagus nerve
Thoracic duct
Azygos vein
Right lung and pleura
Right posterior
intercostal artery
Fig. 22.8 Anterior and lateral relations of esophagus.
Fig. 22.9 Cross section of posterior mediastinum at the level of T8 vertebra showing posterior relations of the esophagus.
--- Page 313 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
Posterior:
1. Vertebral column.
2. Right posterior intercostal arteries.
3. Thoracic duct.
4. Azygos vein.
5. Hemiazygos veins (terminal parts).
6. Descending thoracic aorta.
To the right:
1. Right lung and pleura.
2. Azygos vein.
3. Right vagus nerve.
To the left:
1. Arch of aorta.
2. Left subclavian artery.
3. Thoracic duct.
4. Left lung and pleura.
5. Left recurrent laryngeal nerve.
6. Descending thoracic aorta.
N.B. In the esophageal aperture of the diaphragm, the left 
vagus nerve (now called anterior gastric nerve) is related 
anteriorly and right vagus nerve (now called posterior 
gastric nerve) is related posteriorly.
RELATIONS OF ABDOMINAL PART OF THE ESOPHAGUS
Anterior:
1. Posterior surface of the left lobe of the liver.
2. Left gastric nerve.
Posterior:
1. Left crus of diaphragm.
2. Right gastric nerve.
N.B. The abdominal part of esophagus is shortest (1 to 
2  cm long) and is the only part covered with serous 
membrane—the peritoneum.
ARTERIAL SUPPLY
 
 Blood supply to the cervical part is by inferior thyroid 
arteries.
 
 Blood supply to the thoracic part is by esophageal 
branches of
descending thoracic aorta, and
bronchial arteries.
 
 Blood supply to the abdominal part is by esophageal 
branches of
left gastric artery, and
left inferior phrenic artery.
VENOUS DRAINAGE
 
 Cervical part is drained by inferior thyroid veins.
 
 Thoracic part is drained by azygos and hemiazygos veins.
 
 Abdominal part is drained by two venous channels, viz.
(a) hemiazygos vein, a tributary of inferior vena cava, and
(b) left gastric vein, a tributary of portal vein.
Thus abdominal part of esophagus is the site of portocaval 
anastomosis.
Esophageal varices: The lower end of esophagus is one of 
the important sites of portocaval anastomosis. In portal 
hypertension, e.g., due to the cirrhosis of liver there is back 
pressure in portal circulation. As a result, collateral channels 
of portocaval anastomosis not only open up but become 
dilated and tortuous to form esophageal varices. The 
ruptured esophageal varices cause hematemesis (vomiting 
of blood).
Clinical correlation
LYMPHATIC DRAINAGE
From cervical part, the lymph is drained into deep cervical 
lymph nodes.
From thoracic part, the lymph is drained into posterior 
mediastinal lymph nodes.
From abdominal part, the lymph is drained into left 
gastric lymph nodes.
NERVE SUPPLY
The esophagus is supplied by both parasympathetic and 
sympathetic fibres.
The parasympathetic fibres are derived from recurrent 
laryngeal nerves and esophageal plexuses formed by vagus 
nerves. They provide sensory, motor, and secretomotor 
supply to the esophagus.
The sympathetic fibres are derived from T5–T9 spinal 
segments are sensory and vasomotor.
Referred pain of esophagus: The pain sensations mostly 
arises from the lower part of the esophagus as it is 
vulnerable to acid-peptic esophagitis. Pain sensations are 
carried by sympathetic fibre to the T4 and T5 spinal 
segments.
Therefore, esophageal pain is referred to the lower 
thoracic region and epigastric region of the abdomen, and 
at times it becomes difficult to differentiate esophageal pain 
from the anginal pain.
Clinical correlation
--- Page 314 ---
Trachea and Es ophagus
MICROSCOPIC STRUCTURE
Histologically, esophageal tube from within outwards is 
made up of the following four basic layers (Fig. 22.10):
1. Mucosa: It is composed of the following components:
(a) Epithelium—highly stratified squamous and non-
keratinized.
(b) Lamina 
propria—contains 
cardiac 
esophageal 
glands in the lower part only.
(c) Muscularis mucosa—very-very thick and made up 
of only longitudinal layer of smooth muscle fibres.
2. Submucosa: It contains mucous esophageal glands.
3. Muscular layer:
(a) In upper one-third, it is made up of skeletal muscle.
(b) In middle one-third, it is made up of both skeletal 
and smooth muscles.
(c) In lower one-third, it is made up of smooth muscle.
4. Fibrous membrane (adventitia). It consists of dense 
connective tissue with many elastic fibres.
N.B. A clinical condition in which the stratified squamous 
epithelium of esophagus is replaced by the gastric 
epithelium is called Barrett esophagus. It may lead to 
esophageal carcinoma.
DEVELOPMENT OF THE ESOPHAGUS AND TRACHEA
The esophagus develops from foregut. The respiratory tract 
develops from foregut diverticulum called laryngotracheal 
diverticulum/tube. The following two important events 
occur in the development of esophagus:
(a) Separation of laryngotracheal tube by the formation of 
laryngotracheal septum.
(b) Recanalization of obliterated lumen.
N.B. The failure of canalization of the esophagus leads to 
esophageal atresia and maldevelopment of laryngotracheal 
septum between the esophagus and trachea leads to 
tracheoesophageal fistula.
• Radiological examination of the esophagus by barium 
swallow: It is performed to detect (a) enlargement of the 
left atrium due to mitral stenosis, (b) esophageal strictures, 
and (c) carcinoma and achalasia cardia.
N.B. In normal case, the barium swallow examination 
presents 3 indentations in its outline caused by the 
aortic arch, left principal bronchus, and left atrium.
• Esophagoscopy: It is performed to visualize the interior 
of the esophagus; while passing esophagoscope, the 
sites of normal constrictions should be kept in mind.
• Achalasia cardia: It is a clinical condition in which 
sphincter at the lower end of esophagus fails to relax 
when the food is swallowed. As a result food accumulates 
in the esophagus and its regurgitation occurs. This 
condition occurs due to neuromuscular incoordination, 
probably due to congenital absence of ganglion cells in 
the myenteric plexus of nerves in the esophageal wall. A 
radiographic 
barium 
swallow 
examination 
esophagus reveals a characteristic bird’s beak/rat tail 
appearance.
• Dysphagia (difficulty in swallowing): It occurs due to:
(a) compression of esophagus from outside by aortic 
arch aneurysm, enlargement of lymph nodes, 
abnormal right subclavian artery (passing posterior 
to esophagus), etc. and
(b) narrowing of lumen due to stricture or carcinoma.
• Tracheoesophageal fistula (Fig. 22.11): It is a commonest 
congenital anomaly of esophagus which occurs due to 
failure of separation of the lumen of tracheal tube from
Clinical correlation
Fig. 22.10 Microscopic structure of esophagus. (Source: 
Box 12.6, Page 223, Textboook of Histology and a Practical 
Guide, JP Gunasegaran. Copyright Elsevier 2010, All rights 
reserved.)
Glandular duct
Esophageal (mucous) glands
Lamina propria
Muscularis mucosa
Stratified squamous
epithelium
Upper esophagus
Lower esophagus
Stomach
Trachea
Tracheoesophageal
fistula
Fig. 22.11 Tracheoesophageal fistula.
--- Page 315 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
 that of esophagus by a laryngotracheal septum. In the 
most commonest type of tracheoesophageal fistula, the 
upper esophagus ends blindly and lower esophagus 
communicates with trachea at the level of T4 vertebra. 
Clinically it presents as: (a) hydramnios because fetus is 
unable to swallow amniotic fluid, (b) stomach is distended 
with air, and (c) infant vomit every feed given or may cough 
up bile. The fistula must be closed surgically to avoid 
passage of swallowed liquids into the lungs.
• Malignant tumors of esophagus: They most commonly 
occur in its lower one-third.
The lymph vessels from lower one-third of the esophagus 
descend through the esophageal opening of the diaphragm 
and drain into the celiac lymph nodes around the celiac 
trunk. A malignant tumor from lower one-third of esophagus, 
therefore, spreads below the diaphragm into these lymph 
nodes. Consequently, surgical resection of the lesion 
includes not only the primary site (i.e., esophagus) but also 
celiac lymph nodes and all the regions that drain into these 
lymph nodes such as stomach, upper half of the duodenum, 
spleen, and omenta. The continuity of gut is restored by 
performing an esophagojejunostomy.
--- Page 317 ---
Thoracic Duct, Azygos 
and Hemiazygos 
Veins, and Thoracic 
Sympathetic Trunks
CHAPTER
THORACIC DUCT
The thoracic duct is the largest lymphatic vessel (trunk or 
great lymph channel) which drains lymph from most of the 
body into the bloodstream. The lymph in the thoracic duct is 
milky-white in appearance because it contains a product of 
fat digestion (chyle) from the intestine. The duct appears 
beaded due to the presence of numerous valves in its lumen.
Area of drainage: The thoracic duct drains the lymph 
from all the parts of the body except the (a) right side of the 
head and neck, (b) right side of the chest wall, (c) right lung, 
(d) right side of the heart, and (e) right surface of the liver.
N.B. Thoracic duct drains lymph from whole of the body 
except the right upper quadrant of the body which is 
drained by the right lymphatic duct (Fig. 23.1).
Extent: The thoracic duct extends to the upper end of 
cisterna chyli on the posterior abdominal wall at the lower 
border of T12 vertebra to the junction of left internal jugular 
and left subclavian veins at the root of the neck.
Measurements: The measurements of the thoracic duct are as 
follows:
Length: 45 cm (18 inches).
Width of lumen: 5 mm (at the ends but narrow in the middle).
FORMATION, COURSE, AND 
TERMINATION (Fig. 23.2)
The duct begins in the abdomen at the lower border of T12 
vertebra, as a continuation of cisterna chyli (lying in front of 
the bodies of L1 and L2 vertebrae) and enters the thorax 
through the aortic opening of the diaphragm. It then ascends 
in the posterior mediastinum to the right of midline on the 
front of vertebral bodies. On reaching the T5 vertebra, it 
crosses the midline from right to left side and enters the 
superior mediastinum to run along the left border of the 
esophagus and reaches the root of the neck.
At the root of neck it arches laterally at the level of C7 
vertebra—in front of vertebral system (e.g., vertebral artery 
and vertebral vein) and left cervical sympathetic trunk and 
behind the carotid system (e.g., left common carotid artery, 
left internal jugular vein, and left vagus nerve). The summit 
of arch lies 3–4 cm above the clavicle. Finally, the duct 
Fig. 23.1 Lymphatic drainage of the body. Note that the 
lymph from right upper quadrant of the body is drained by 
the right lymphatic duct. The lymph from remaining area of 
the body is drained by the thoracic duct.
Right upper quadrant
of the body
(drained by right
lymphatic duct)
Whole of body except
right upper quadrant
(drained by
thoracic duct)
--- Page 319 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax
D. In the root of the neck (Fig. 23.3)
Anterior: Carotid sheath containing left common carotid 
artery, left internal jugular vein, and left vagus nerve.
Posterior:
1. Vertebral artery and vein.
2. Scalenus anterior muscle (medial border).
3. Phrenic nerve.
4. Thyrocervical trunk and its branches (e.g., 
suprascapular, 
transverse 
cervical, 
inferior thyroid arteries).
TRIBUTARIES
The tributaries of the thoracic duct are as follows (Fig. 23.4):
A. In the abdomen
Efferent from lower six intercostal lymph nodes of both 
sides.
B. In the thorax
1. A pair of the ascending lymph trunks which drains 
lymph from the upper lumbar lymph nodes (para-aortic 
lymph nodes).
2. A pair of the descending lymph trunks which drain 
lymph from the posterior intercostal lymph nodes of 
upper six spaces.
3. Lymph vessels from the posterior mediastinal lymph 
nodes.
C. In the neck
1. Left jugular lymph trunk, draining lymph from the 
neck.
2. Left subclavian lymph trunk, draining lymph from the 
left upper limb.
3. Left bronchomediastinal trunk.
• Injury of thoracic duct: The thoracic duct is thin walled 
and may be colorless, therefore, it is sometimes injured 
inadvertently during surgical procedures in the posterior 
mediastinum. Laceration of the thoracic duct during lung 
surgery results in chyle entering into the pleural cavity 
producing a clinical condition called chylothorax.
The cervical part of thoracic duct may be damaged 
during block dissection of the neck. It should be ligated 
immediately. If ligated, the lymph returns by anastomotic 
channels. But if the injury is not detected at the time of 
operation, and hence not ligated, it may cause an 
unpleasant chylus fi stula and leakage of lymph. Immediate 
ligation of duct is required to stop the leakage.
• Obstruction of thoracic duct: Sometimes in filarial 
infection, the thoracic duct is obstructed by microfilarial 
parasites (Wuchereria bancrofti) leading to widespread 
effects, such as chylothorax, chyloperitoneum, chyluria, 
and even the accumulation of chyle in the tunica vaginalis 
(chylocele).
Clinical correlation
Fig. 23.4 Tributaries of the thoracic duct.
Left bronchomediastinal
lymph trunk
Descending thoracic
lymph trunk
Cisterna chyli
Lumbar lymph trunks
Intestinal lymph trunks
Left subclavian lymph trunk
Right lymphatic duct
Right jugular trunk
Right subclavian trunk
Right
bronchomediastinal
trunk
Thoracic duct
Left jugular lymph trunk
--- Page 320 ---
Thoracic Duct, Azygos and Hemiazygos Veins, and Thoracic Sympathetic Trunks
Development
There are three stages in the development of the thoracic 
duct (Fig. 23.5).
Stage I: In this stage, network of lymph channels is seen in 
front of the thoracic part of the vertebral column.
Stage II: In this stage, two longitudinal lymph channels 
appear, in the network of lymph channels, one on the left 
and another on the right with a number of cross 
communications.
Stage III: In this stage, the cross communication appears 
opposite the T5 vertebra, right longitudinal channel below 
this cross communication and left longitudinal channel 
above this cross communication persists and form the 
thoracic duct. All the other parts disappear.
AZYGOS AND HEMIAZYGOS VEINS
The term azygos means single i.e. without a companion. 
Azygos system of veins consists of azygos, hemiazygos, and 
accessory hemiazygos veins. These veins lie in front of 
thoracic part of vertebral column and play an important role 
in the venous drainage of the thorax.
AZYGOS VEIN (Fig. 23.6)
The azygos vein is present only on the right side in the upper 
part of the posterior abdominal wall and the posterior 
mediastinum. It connects the inferior vena cava with the 
superior vena cava. It is provided with valves and may appear 
tortuous.
The functions of azygos vein are as follows:
1. It drains venous blood from the thoracic wall and upper 
lumbar region.
2. It forms an important collateral channel connecting the 
superior vena cava and inferior vena cava.
FORMATION
The formation of azygos vein is variable. It is formed in one 
of the following ways:
1. Formed by the union of right subcostal and right 
ascending lumbar vein at the level of T12 vertebra 
(common).
2. Arises from the posterior aspect of the inferior vena cava 
(IVC) near the renal veins.
3. As a continuation of right subcostal vein.
4. Occasionally, it may arise from right renal or right first 
lumbar vein.
COURSE AND TERMINATION
The azygos vein after formation ascends up and leaves the 
abdomen by passing through the aortic opening of the 
diaphragm and enters the posterior mediastinum. There it 
ascends vertically lying in front of vertebral column up to the 
level of T4 vertebra, where it arches forwards above the 
hilum of the right lung to terminate in the superior vena 
cava at the level of the 2nd costal cartilage.
Fig. 23.5 Development of the thoracic duct.
Stage I
Network of 
lymph channels
Thoracic duct
Two longitudinal
lymph channels
Stage II
Stage III
Fig. 23.6 Azygos, hemiazygos, and accessory hemiazygos 
veins.
11 Hemiazygos vein
Left subcostal
vein
Left ascending
lumbar vein
Left renal vein
Inferior vena cava
Right subcostal
vein
Right ascending
lumbar vein
Right renal vein
Accessory
hemiazygos vein
Azygos vein
Superior
vena cava
Arch of
 azygos vein