
--- Page 16 ---
Living Anatomy of the 
Head and Neck
CHAPTER
HEAD
The head is the globular cranial end of the body, which 
contains brain and special sense organs, viz. eyes for vision, 
ears for hearing and equilibrium, nose for smell, and tongue 
for taste. It also provides openings for the respiratory and 
digestive systems. Structurally and developmentally, the head 
is divided into two parts: cranium and face.
The cranium (also known as braincase) contains the brain. 
The face possesses openings of eyes, nose, and mouth.
A little description of comparative anatomy makes the 
distinction between the size of cranium and face easier to 
understand.
The sense of smell is one of the oldest sensibilities. The 
pronograde canines (e.g., dog) are guided predominantly by 
smell for searching food and sex. The other senses, such as 
touch, hearing, and vision play an accessory role. Therefore, 
they have well-developed snout, and, their face is located in 
front of the cranium (Fig. 1.1).
The arboreal mode of life of apes and monkeys favored 
the higher development of visual, acoustic, tactile, 
kinesthetic, and motor functions with improvement in 
their intelligence. In these animals, usefulness of the nose 
was lost and sense of smell became an accessory sense. 
Consequently in orthograde monkeys, it resulted in the loss 
of the projecting snout, and there face is located below and 
in front of the cranium.
The supremacy of man in animal kingdom is due to his 
large well-developed brain, which provides him the 
unlimited power of thinking, reasoning, and judgement. To 
accommodate large brain, the size of cranium has also 
increased proportionately. Consequently, in plantigrade 
man the forehead is prominent and the face is located 
below the anterior part of the cranium.
It is important to note that size of jaws is inversely 
proportional to the size of cranium. Thus the pronograde 
canine has larger jaws; an orthograde monkey has smaller 
jaws whereas plantigrade man has smallest jaws. The 
reduction in the size of jaws occurred due to change in eating 
habits of these animals. The jaws are smallest in man because 
he prefers to eat soft cooked food. The size of jaws is larger in 
canines because they use it for holding, breaking, biting, 
tearing, and chewing the food. With receding jaws, the 
mouth is proportionately reduced in size.
In man, eyes are placed in more frontal plane to enable 
stereoscopic vision. To permit freedom of mobility to the 
tongue for a well-articulated speech in man, the alveolar 
arches are broadened and the chin is pushed forward, making 
Fig. 1.1 Change in position of face in relation to cranium 
during evolution. The face is located in front of cranium in 
dog, below and in front of cranium in monkey and below the 
anterior part of cranium in man. Note that the size of jaws is 
inversely proportional to the size of cranium (C = cranium, 
F = face).
Monkey
--- Page 17 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
the mouth cavity more roomy. The prominent chin is a 
characteristic feature of human beings. The distinctive 
external nose with prominent dorsum, tip, and alae is 
characteristic of a man, although it has nothing to do with 
the sense of smell. Probably it serves to protect the eyes from 
injuries. The brow ridges are markedly reduced in man as 
compared to other primates due to their prominent forehead.
LIVING ANATOMY
The living anatomy deals with the examination of surface 
features by visualization (inspection) and palpation of the 
living individuals to get information about the deeper 
structures. It is of immense importance in clinical examination 
of the patients. The study of living anatomy (also called living 
or surface anatomy) of head and neck begins with the division 
of the surface into regions and examining surface landmarks 
in each region. The students are advised to practice finding 
these landmarks in each region on themselves or on their 
colleagues to develop the skill of examination.
REGIONS OF THE HEAD
The head is divided into the following regions: frontal, 
parietal, occipital, temporal, auricular, parotid, orbital, nasal, 
zygomatic, buccal, oral, and mental (Fig. 1.2).
FRONTAL REGION (FOREHEAD)
The frontal region of the head is an area superior to the eyes 
and below the hair line. Eyebrows are the raised arches of 
skin with short, thick hairs above the supraorbital margins. 
Just deep to eyebrow is the curved bony ridge or superciliary 
arch. It is more prominent in adult males. The smooth non-
hairy elevated area between the eyebrows is called glabella,
which tends to be flat in children and adult females, and 
forms a rounded prominence in adult males. Indian married 
Hindu females apply bindi at this site to enhance their beauty. 
It is important to note that the pineal gland lies about 7 cm 
behind the glabella. The prominence of forehead, the frontal 
eminence is evident on either side above the eyebrow. The 
frontal prominence is typically more pronounced in children 
and adult females.
PARIETAL REGION
It is an area limited anteriorly by hair line and posteriorly by 
a coronal plane behind the parietal eminences and on either 
side by the temporal line. The parietal eminence can be felt 
on either side in this region about 2 inches above the auricle. 
The parietal prominences are evident on or just in front of 
the interauricular line.
OCCIPITAL REGION
The occipital region is an area of cranium behind the parietal 
eminences, and above the external occipital protuberance 
and superior nuchal lines.
The most prominent point in the occipital region is 
called opisthocranion or occiput. The external occipital 
protuberance can be felt in the median line just above the 
nuchal furrow. The superior nuchal line, one on either side 
of external occipital protuberance, runs laterally with its 
convexity facing upwards. 
The soft tissue covering frontal, parietal, and occipital 
regions forms the scalp.
The large area of scalp over the vault of skull is thickly 
covered by terminal hair. Due to presence of hair, many 
lesions in this area remain unnoticed by both clinicians and 
patients. Hence, this area should be carefully examined by 
the clinicians.
Clinical correlation
TEMPORAL REGION (TEMPLE)
The temporal region is the area on the side of skull between 
the temporal line and zygomatic arch (Fig. 1.3). It is the site 
of attachment of temporalis muscle, which can be palpated 
when the teeth are clenched repeatedly. Try on yourself. Soft 
tissue in the temporal region includes skin, subcutaneous 
tissue, temporal fascia, and temporalis muscle. In the anterior 
part of temporal region, deep to soft tissues is a small area 
where four bones meet the pterion (Fig. 1.3). This region is 
clinically important because it is the site of entrance to 
cranial cavity in craniotomy to remove the extradural 
Fig. 1.2 Regions of the head.
Parietal region
Parietal
eminence
Frontal region
Hair line
Orbital region
Infraorbital
region
Nasal region
Mental region
Buccal
region
Zygomatic region
Occipital
region
Oral region
Auricular
region
Temporal
region
Parotid
region
--- Page 18 ---
Living Anatomy of the Head and Neck
hematoma. Pterion is described in detail on page 18. The 
temporal region (temple) is described in detail on page 50.
AURICULAR REGION
The auricular region includes fleshy oval flap of the ear 
(auricle) and external acoustic meatus.
The auricle collects the sound waves. The external 
auditory meatus is a tube through which sound waves are 
transmitted to the middle ear within the skull. Observe the 
following surface features of the auricle (Fig. 1.4).
The superior and posterior free margins of the auricle 
forming a kind of rim are called helix, which ends inferiorly 
at the fleshy protuberance of the ear called ear lobule.
The upper end of the helix is typically at the level of the 
eyebrows and the glabella.
The lobule is approximately at the level of the apex of the 
nose.
The portion of the auricle anterior to the external auditory 
meatus is a small nodular flap of tissue called tragus. It 
projects posteriorly, partially covering and protecting the 
external auditory meatus. The condyle of mandible can be 
palpated by putting the tip of finger just in front of tragus 
and then opening and closing the mouth.
Another flap of tissue opposite the tragus is the antitra-
gus. Between the tragus and antitragus is a deep notch called 
intertragic notch.
A semicircular ridge anterior to the helix is called 
antihelix.
The upper end of antihelix divides into two crura 
enclosing a triangular depression called triangular fossa. The 
depressed hollow of the auricle is called concha.
The upper end of the helix which extends backwards to 
some extent into concha is called crux of helix.
The external auditory meatus and tragus are important 
landmarks to use when taking extraoral radiographs and 
administering local anesthesia on a patient. The pulsa tions 
of superficial temporal artery can be felt by putting the 
fingertip just in front and above the tragus on the root of 
zygoma.
Clinical correlation
PAROTID REGION
As the name implies, it is region around the ear (para = 
around; otic = ear). It is limited in front by anterior border 
Asterion
External
occipital
protuberance
Mastoid
process
Head of
mandible
Angle of
mandible
(gonion)
Mental
protuberance
Zygomatic
arch
Pterion
Temporal line
Fig. 1.3 Surface landmarks on the lateral aspect of the head.
Fig. 1.4 Lateral view of right auricle: A, schematic figure; B, actual picture.
Scaphoid
fossa
Darwin’s
tubercle
Helix
Antihelix
Cymba
conchae
Concha
Lobule
Antitragus
Intertragic notch
Tragus
External acoustic
meatus
Crus of helix
Triangular fossa
Crura of antihelix
--- Page 19 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
of masseter, behind by mastoid process and below by line 
extending from angle of mandible to the tip of mastoid 
process. This region is occupied by parotid gland. The 
mastoid process lies behind the lower part of the ear. Its 
anterior border, tip and posterior border can be easily felt.
The masseter overlies the ramus of the mandible. It can be 
felt when the teeth are clenched.
The parotid gland is often enlarged following infection by 
mumps virus. This produces a painful swelling in the parotid 
region elevating the ear lobule. The parotid gland is also the 
site of slow growing painless tumor called mixed parotid 
tumor.
Clinical correlation
ORBITAL (OCULAR) REGION
The ocular region includes the eyeball and associated struc-
tures. Most of the surface features of the ocular region pro-
tect the eye (Fig. 1.5). Eyebrow is a ridge of hair along the 
superciliary arch above the orbit, which protects the eyes 
against sunlight and mechanical blow. The two movable eye-
lids reflexly close to protect eyes from foreign particles and 
bright sunlight (for details on eyelids see Chapter 3). The 
eyelashes are a row of hair at the margins of eyelids. The eye-
lashes prevent airborne objects from contacting the eyeball. 
Behind the lateral part of the upper eyelid and within the 
orbit is the lacrimal gland, which produces lacrimal fluid or 
tears. The tears wash away chemical and foreign particles and 
lubricate the front of the eye to prevent the surface of the 
eyeball, particularly the all-important cornea from drying.
The conjunctiva is a delicate thin mucous membrane 
which lines the inner surface of the eyelids and the front of 
the eyeball. It aids in reducing friction during blinking.
The sclera, the ‘white’ of the eye is seen on either side of 
cornea.
The cornea is the circular transparent anterior portion of 
the eyeball. 
Fig. 1.5 Frontal view of the left eye.
Eyebrow
Upper eyelid
Lacrimal gland
Cilia
Lateral canthus
Sclera
Lower eyelid
Pupil
Medial
canthus
Iris
Lacrimal
caruncle
The outer corner where the upper and lower eyelids meet 
is called lateral (outer) canthus. The inner corner where the 
two eyelids meet is called medial canthus. A fleshy pinkish 
elevation in the medial angle of the eye is called lacrimal 
caruncle.
Palpate the following landmarks in this region (Fig. 1.6) 
in yourself:
1. Supraorbital notch on the highest point of supraorbital 
margin about 2.5 cm from the midline.
2. Frontozygomatic suture, which is marked by a slight 
irregular depression on the lateral orbital margin.
The condition of the eyes profoundly affects the facial 
appearance. Lesions affecting the eye and its associated 
structures are enormous. A few easily recognizable and 
surgically relevant conditions are as follows:
• Arcus senilis, a white rim around the outer edge of the iris, 
is commonly seen in elderly people. It occurs due to 
sclerosis and deposition of cholesterol in the edge of the 
cornea.
• Xanthelasma are fatty plaques in the skin of the eyelids. 
They look like masses of yellow opaque fat. If multiple and 
growing, they indicate underlying abnormality of choles-
terol metabolism, diabetes, or arterial disease.
• Exophthalmos is a forward protrusion of the eyeball from 
its normal position in the orbit. The commonest cause of 
both bilateral and unilateral exophthalmos is thyrotoxico-
sis (hyperthyroidism).
• Ectropion is the eversion of the lower eyelid.
Clinical correlation
NASAL REGION
The main feature of nasal region is the external nose. It is a 
pyramidal projection in the middle third of the face with its 
root up and base downwards (Fig. 1.6). The root of the nose 
is located between the eyes inferior to glabella. The firm 
Fig. 1.6 Surface landmarks on frontal aspect of the head.
Frontal
prominence
Eyebrow
Supraorbital
notch
Nasion
Bridge of nose
Infraorbital
foramen
Nostril (or nare)
Angle of mouth
Mental foramen
Glabella
Superciliary
arch
Frontozygomatic
suture
Infraorbital
margin
Ala of nose
Tip of nose
--- Page 20 ---
Living Anatomy of the Head and Neck
narrow bony portion below the nasion is the bridge of the 
nose. The nose below this level has pliable cartilaginous 
framework that maintains the openings of the nose. The tip 
of the nose is called apex. It is flexible when palpated because 
it is made up of cartilage. Inferolateral to the apex on either 
side is a nostril (or nare). The nostrils are separated from 
each other by a midline nasal septum. The nares are bounded 
laterally by wing-like alae of the nose. The alae of nose forms 
the flared outer margin of each nostril.
The distinctive external nose with exuberant growth of 
cartilages forming prominent dorsum, tip, and alae is a 
characteristic feature of human beings.
A well-marked depression at the root of the nose is called 
nasion.
• Saddle nose: A nose whose bridge is depressed and 
widened.
• Rhinophyma: The nasal skin covering the alar cartilages 
is thick and adherent, and contains many sebaceous 
glands. The hypertrophy and adenomatous changes of 
these glands gives rise to a lobulated tumor called 
rhinophyma.
Clinical correlation
INFRAORBITAL REGION
The infraorbital region of head is located below the orbital 
region and corresponds to the upper part of the anterior 
surface of the maxilla. The infraorbital foramen is located in 
this region about 1 cm below the infraorbital margin in line 
with the supraorbital notch or foramen (Fig. 1.6). The 
knowledge of its location is important for giving infraorbital 
nerve block.
ZYGOMATIC REGION
The zygomatic region overlies the zygomatic (cheek) bone 
and zygomatic arch.
The zygomatic arch extends from just inferior to lateral 
margin of the eye towards the upper portion of the auricle. 
Inferior to the zygomatic arch and just anterior to the tragus 
of the ear is the temporomandibular joint. The zygomatic 
arch is bony bridge that spans the interval between the ear 
and the eye. The zygomatic bone forms the bony prominence 
of the cheek below and lateral to the orbit.
The movements of the temporomandibular joint can be 
felt by opening and closing the mouth or moving the lower 
jaw from side to side. One way to feel the movements of head 
of mandible is to gently place a finger into the outer portion 
of the external auditory meatus.
BUCCAL REGION
The buccal region of face is a broad area of the face between 
the nose, mouth, and parotid region. It overlies the buccina-
tor muscle. It is made of soft tissues of the cheek.
The pulsations of facial artery can be felt about 1.25 cm 
lateral to the angle of the mouth.
ORAL REGION
The structures of the oral region include fleshy upper and 
lower lips, and the structures of oral cavity that can be 
observed when the mouth is widely open.
The lips are chiefly composed of muscles covered exter-
nally by skin and internally by mucous membrane. Each lip 
has a pinkish zone called vermillion zone. The lips are out-
lined from the surrounding skin by a transition zone called 
vermillion border. The small triangular median depression in 
the upper lip is called philtrum. The apex of philtrum is 
towards the nasal septum and the base downwards where it 
terminates in a thicker area called tubercle of the upper lip.
The corners of mouth where upper and lower lips meet 
are called labial commissure. The groove running upward 
between the labial commissure and the alae of nose is called 
nasolabial sulcus. The lower lip is separated from the chin by 
a horizontal groove called labiomental groove (Fig. 1.7).
Philtrum
Nasolabial
sulcus
Upper lip
Lower lip
Mental
protuberance
(mentum)
Vermillion
border
Vermillion
zone
Labial
commissure
Tubercle of
upper lip
Labiomental
groove
Fig. 1.7 Frontal view of the lips: A, schematic figure; B, actual picture.
--- Page 21 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
The color of the lips and the mucus membrane of the oral 
cavity are clinically important; lips may appear pale in 
patients with severe anemia or bluish in people suffering 
from lack of oxygenation of blood (cyanosis). A lemon yellow 
tint of lips may indicate jaundice.
The lips are a common site for carcinoma, mostly affecting 
individuals above 60 years of age. Carcinoma of the lip 
usually occurs in lower lip (93%) as compared to the upper 
lip (5%).
Clinical correlation
The bone underlying the upper lip is the alveolar process 
of the maxilla, whereas the bone underlying the lower lip is 
the alveolar process of the mandible. The alveolar processes 
contain teeth and are called maxillary and mandibular 
teeth. 
MENTAL REGION
The mental region is an area of face below the lower lip and 
is characterized by the presence of mental protuberance or 
mentum, a privileged feature of human beings (Fig. 1.7).
Important bony landmarks in the region of the head are 
summarized in Table 1.1.
Examine the following structures of oral cavity by asking 
your friend to open his mouth widely (Fig. 1.8).
Table 1.1 Bony landmarks in the region of head
Landmark
Location
Mental protuberance/
mentum
Protuberance of the chin
Nasion
Depression at the root of nose at the junction of frontonasal and internasal sutures
Glabella
Smooth non-hairy area between the eyebrows above nasion
Vertex
Highest point on the top of head in the midline
External occipital 
protuberance
Knob-like bony projection at the upper end of nuchal furrow
Inion
Apex of external occipital protuberance
Gonion
Angle of mandible
Head of mandible
In front of lower part of the tragus
Preauricular point
In front of upper part of the tragus
Mastoid process
Behind the lower part of the auricle
Pterion
4 cm above the midpoint of zygomatic arch/3.5 cm behind and 1.5 cm above the frontozygomatic suture
Asterion
Depression—2.5 cm behind the upper part of the root of ear
Supraorbital notch/foramen
On the supraorbital margin 2.5 cm from midline
Infraorbital foramen
1 cm below infraorbital margin and 1.25 cm lateral to the side of nose
Mental foramen
2.5 cm lateral to symphysis menti and 1.25 cm above the lower border of mandible
Frontal prominence
Area of maximum convexity on either side of forehead where top, front and side of head meet
Parietal prominence
Area of maximum convexity on either side in the parietal region where back, top and side of head meet 
(Area of maximum transverse diameter of the skull)
Fig. 1.8 Features of the oral cavity and oropharynx.
Uvula
Palatopharyngeal arch
Palatoglossal arch
Palatine tonsil
Posterior wall of
pharynx
Tongue
 The part of oral cavity inside the alveolar arches is called 
oral cavity proper. It contains a mobile muscular organ, 
the tongue.
--- Page 22 ---
Living Anatomy of the Head and Neck
 The oral cavity is lined by a mucus membrane or mucosa. 
The inner aspects of the lips are lined by pink and thick 
labial mucosa. The labial mucosa is continuous with the 
equally pink and thick buccal mucosa that lines the inner 
cheek. 
 The space between cheek/lip and gum is called vestibule.
 On the inner aspect of buccal mucosa opposite the upper 
second molar tooth is a small elevation called parotid 
papilla on which opens the parotid duct.
 The gingiva is a part of oral mucosa that covers the 
alveolar processes of the jaws.
 The roof of oral cavity which presents two portions: (a) a 
firm anterior portion is called hard palate and a flexible 
posterior portion is called soft palate. A cone-shaped 
projection hanging down from the middle of the posterior 
free margin is called uvula of the palate, which is 
continuous with palatopharyngeal arch on each side.
 A dense pad of soft tissue behind the last molar tooth is 
called retromolar pad.
 The floor of mouth is located inferior to the ventral 
surface of the tongue.
N.B. The oral cavity provides entrance into the throat or the 
pharynx. 
One can easily examine the following features in the 
oropharynx (Fig. 1.8):
1. A curved, leaf-like flap of cartilage is located behind the 
base of tongue and in front of oropharynx. It is epiglottis, 
the cartilage of the larynx. 
2. Mass of lymphoid tissue projecting on either side into the 
lateral wall of the oropharynx is called palatine tonsil 
(Fig. 1.8). The palatine tonsils are generally called tonsils
by the patients. The tonsil lies in triangular fossa called 
tonsillar fossa located between the palatoglossal and 
palato pharyngeal arches. Note that the tonsils lie 
opposite the angle of mandible between the back of 
tongue and soft palate.
NECK
The neck is approximately a cylindrical region of the body 
that connects the head to the trunk. It supports and permit 
the movements of the head.
TOPOGRAPHICAL ORGANIZATION OF THE NECK
The neck is flexible and provides passage to several 
structures such as spinal cord, trachea, esophagus, blood 
vessels supplying the brain, the last four cranial nerves, etc. 
All these structures are essential for the sustenance of life.
The investing layer of deep cervical fascia encloses the 
neck like a collar. It splits to enclose sternocleidomastoid and 
trapezius muscles in its course around the neck. The two 
fascial layers (called pretracheal and prevertebral fasciae) 
extending from the investing layer of deep fascia across the 
structures within the neck divide the neck into anterior and 
posterior compartments (Fig. 1.9). 
Topographically, the structures of the neck are organized 
into anterior and posterior compartments. 
ANTERIOR COMPARTMENT
The basic topography of the anterior compartment is simple 
(Fig. 1.10). In the midline there are two tubes: the respiratory 
tract (larynx and trachea) in front and digestive tract 
(pharynx and esophagus) behind. The thyroid gland clasps 
the front and sides of the larynx and trachea and overlaps the 
carotid tree on either side. These structures are bounded 
anteriorly by pretracheal fascia, which extends on either side 
to merge with the investing layer of deep cervical fascia deep 
to sternocleidomastoid.
On either side of the midline tubes are several ascending 
and descending neurovascular structures, such as carotid 
tree consisting of common carotid, internal carotid and 
external carotid arteries, internal jugular vein and last four 
cranial nerves. At the upper end these structures enter or 
leave the skull through various foramina in the base of the 
skull, viz. foramen ovale, foramen spinosum, carotid canal, 
and jugular foramen.
POSTERIOR COMPARTMENT
The posterior compartment of neck consists of cervical part 
of vertebral column and its surrounding musculature 
(Fig. 1.10). This musculoskeletal block is bounded by 
prevertebral fascia, which merges behind on either side with 
the deep fascia enclosing the trapezius muscle. The 
Trachea
Skin
Superficial fascia
Investing layer of
deep cervical fascia
Pretracheal
fascia
Esophagus
Common
carotid artery
Internal
jugular vein
Anterior
compartment
(visceral
compartment)
Posterior
compartment
Sternocleido-
mastoid
Prevertebral
fascia
Trapezius
Fig. 1.9 The basic plan of the neck in cross section. 
Note the location of anterior and posterior compartments.
--- Page 23 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
musculature includes: (a) prevertebral muscles located in 
front of the cervical column, (b) scalene muscles extending 
between the neck and upper two ribs, and (c) muscles of the 
back of the neck.
The vertebral canal within the cervical vertebral column 
provides passage to the spinal cord. The roots of cervical 
spinal nerves come out through intervertebral foramina in 
this region. The ventral rami of the first four cervical nerves 
form the cervical plexus and ventral rami of the lower four 
cervical nerves along with ventral ramus of T1 form the 
brachial plexus.
The neck, therefore, is a complex region of the body. The 
spinal cord, digestive and respiratory tracts, and major blood 
vessels traverse this highly flexible area. The neural structures 
present in the region include: last four cranial nerves and 
cervical and brachial plexuses. Several organs are also located 
here. The musculature of neck produces an array of move-
ments in this area. The layout of these structures is depicted 
in Figure 1.11 to understand the typography of the neck.
N.B. A newborn baby has no visible neck because his or her 
lower jaw and chin touches the shoulders and thorax.
REGIONS OF THE NECK
The neck is divided into the four regions:
1. Anterior region.
2. Right lateral region.
3. Left lateral region.
4. Posterior region (nucha).
ANTERIOR REGION (CERVIX)
The anterior region of the neck contains strap muscles, 
digestive (pharynx and esophagus) and respiratory (larynx 
and trachea) tracts, vessels to and from the head, last four 
cranial nerves, and thyroid and parathyroid glands.
The following structures can be easily palpated in the 
anterior region of the neck.
In the midline (Fig. 1.12):
1. Hyoid bone: It is situated in a depression behind and 
slightly below the chin and can be easily felt if the neck is 
slightly extended. The hyoid bone can be gripped 
between the thumb and index finger and moved from 
side to side.
2. Thyroid cartilage: It is the most prominent feature in 
the anterior region of the neck, particularly the anterior 
angle formed by the fusion of its two laminae which 
Fig. 1.11 Basic layout of structures of the neck.
Anterior
compartment
Posterior
compartment
Thyroid gland
Respiratory tract
Sternocleidomastoid
Digestive tract
Parathyroid gland
Common carotid artery
Internal jugular vein
Vagus nerve
Cervical sympathetic chain
Prevertebral muscles
Scalene muscles
Root of cervical nerve 
Muscles of back
Trapezius
Fig. 1.10 Cross section of the neck showing anatomical details (S = spinal cord, C = cervical vertebra).
Hyoid bone
Midline tubes
Thyroid gland
Brachial
plexus
Neurovascular
structures
Ventral rami
of cervical
plexus
--- Page 24 ---
Living Anatomy of the Head and Neck
form the laryngeal prominence. It is prominent in males 
and called Adam’s apple whereas in females it is not 
usually apparent. The thyroid notch, the curved upper 
border of the thyroid cartilage can be easily palpated.
3. Cricoid cartilage: It can be easily palpated below the 
thyroid cartilage.
4. Tracheal rings: These can be palpated below the cricoid 
cartilage by pressing gently backwards above the jugular 
notch.
5. Isthmus of the thyroid gland: It lies on the front of the 
2nd, 3rd, and 4th tracheal rings and can be palpated.
6. Suprasternal (jugular) notch: It is a depression just 
superior to sternum between the medial expanded ends 
of the clavicle and can be easily palpated.
The vertebral levels of some of the structures that can be 
palpated in the anterior midline of the neck are given in 
Table 1.2.
Table 1.2 Vertebral levels of structures in the anterior 
midline of the neck
Structure
Vertebral level
Hyoid bone
Upper border and notch of 
thyroid cartilage
C3/C4
Thyroid cartilage
C4–C5
Cricoid cartilage
Suprasternal notch
T2/T3
On either side of the midline (Fig. 1.12):
1. Thyroid lobe: It can be palpated on either side just below 
the level of cricoid cartilage.
2. Common carotid artery: It can be observed and 
palpated on either side at the level of junction between 
the larynx and trachea along the anterior border of 
sternocleido-mastoid muscle.
The common carotid artery can be compressed against 
the prominent anterior tubercle of transverse process of the 
6th cervical vertebra called carotid tubercle (Chassaignac’s 
tubercle).
RIGHT AND LEFT LATERAL REGIONS 
(RIGHT AND LEFT SIDES OF THE NECK) 
The lateral regions on either side are composed of two large 
superficial muscles of the neck and cervical lymph nodes.
The following structures can be palpated in the lateral 
region:
1. Mastoid process: It can be easily felt behind the lower 
part of the auricle.
2. Clavicle: It is easily visible in thin people and palpable 
along its entire extent except in morbidly obese persons 
because it is subcutaneous throughout.
3. Sternocleidomastoid: It can be palpated along its entire 
length. When the head is turned to the opposite side it 
forms a prominent raised ridge that extends diagonally 
from mastoid process to sternum. The tendon of this 
muscle becomes especially prominent to the side of the 
jugular notch.
4. Trapezius: The anterior border of trapezius becomes 
prominent when the person is asked to shrug his 
shoulder against the resistance.
5. External jugular vein: It can be seen as it crosses 
obliquely across the sternocleidomastoid muscle, 
particularly if a person is angry or if the collar of his 
shirt is too tight.
6. Transverse process of the atlas vertebra: It can be felt on 
deep pressure midway between the angle of the mandible 
and the mastoid process.
Cervical lymph nodes in the lateral region of the neck often 
become swollen and painful from infections of the oral and 
pharyngeal regions.
Clinical correlation
POSTERIOR REGION (OR NUCHA)
The posterior region of neck includes cervical vertebral 
column, spinal cord, and associated structures.
The following structures can be palpated in the posterior 
region of the neck (Fig. 1.13).
Clavicle
Trapezius
Sternocleido-
mastoid
Mastoid process
Suprasternal notch
Tracheal rings
Isthmus of 
thyroid gland
Cricoid cartilage
Thyroid cartilage
Hyoid bone
Transverse process of
atlas vertebra
Angle of mandible
Fig. 1.12 Surface landmarks in the anterior median and 
lateral regions of the neck.
--- Page 25 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
1. External occipital protuberance: It can be easily 
palpated with inion at its summit at the upper end of 
nuchal furrow in the posterior midline of the neck.
2. Superior nuchal line: It can sometimes be palpated as 
a curved bony line with concavity below extending 
from external occipital protuberance to the mastoid 
process.
3. Spine of 7th cervical vertebra (vertebra prominence): It 
can be felt at the lower end of nuchal furrow especially 
when the neck is flexed.
Fig. 1.14 Location of the anterior and posterior cervical 
triangles of the neck.
Fig. 1.13 Surface landmarks in the posterior region of the 
neck.
External occipital
protuberance
Superior
nuchal line
Inion
Nuchal furrow
Spine of 7th
cervical vertebra
Posterior
cervical triangle
Sternocleidomastoid
muscle
Anterior
cervical triangle
4. Ligamentum nuchae: It is raised when the neck is flexed 
and extends from spine of C7 vertebra below to the 
external occipital protuberance above.
Clinically, the posterior region of neck is extremely important 
because of the debilitating damage it sustains from whiplash 
injury or a broken neck.
Clinical correlation
TRIANGLES OF THE NECK 
The neck is conventionally divided into various triangles. 
The sternocleidomastoid muscle transects the side of neck 
obliquely on each side and divides it into anterior and 
posterior cervical triangles (Fig. 1.14).
--- Page 26 ---
Living Anatomy of the Head and Neck
Golden Facts to Remember
  Most expressive feature of the face
Eyes
  Most projecting part of the face 
Nose
  Most important surface landmark of head which 
can neither be seen nor palpated
Pterion
  Stiles’ method of locating pterion
Place the thumb behind the frontal process of 
zygomatic bone and two fingers above the 
zygomatic arch. The angle between the thumb and 
upper finger lies on pterion
  Most important surface landmark in the region of 
neck
Cricoid cartilage
  Most prominent feature on the front of neck in 
the midline
Laryngeal prominence/Adam’s apple
  Chief characterizing facial feature of man
Nose
A 20-year-old medical student went to a hill station on 
his motorbike to enjoy his summer vacation. After 
enjoying his holidays, while returning home his bike hit 
a rock and overturned. He became unconscious. He was 
rescued and taken to a nearby hospital by some tourists. 
The attending physician first assessed the level of his 
consciousness using Glasgow coma scale. He regained 
consciousness by the time he was examined in the hos-
pital. He had superficial wounds in the temporal region 
of his head but had no other obvious injures. 
Radiographs of his skull were taken, which did not 
reveal any fracture or hematoma. He was discharged 
from the hospital one hour after being given first-aid.
Questions
1. Enumerate any four regions in cranial part of the 
head?
2. What is ‘Glasgow coma scale’?
3. What are the boundaries of temporal region?
Answers
1. (a) Frontal region, (b) parietal region, (c) temporal 
region, and (d) occipital region.
2. It is a scale used to record the level of consciousness 
by testing certain functions and seeing their 
response. The baseline observation of this sort 
form an important first step in the assessment of 
every case of head injury, and gives a good initial 
indication of the degree of brain damage.
Table C1 Glasgow coma scale (GCS)
Function tested
Response
Score
Eye opening
Spontaneous
To verbal command
To pain
No response
Best verbal 
response
Oriented and converses
Disoriented and converses
Inappropriate words
Incomprehensible sounds
No response
Best motor 
response
Obeys verbal commands
Localizes pain
Flexes normally
Flexes abnormally
Extends
No response
 
 Total score ranges from 3 to 15 when the full 
scale is used.
3. The temporal region is bounded above by temporal 
line and below by zygomatic arch.
Clinical Case Study
--- Page 27 ---
Osteology of the 
Head and Neck
CHAPTER
The study of osteology (bony skeleton) of head and neck 
forms the basis to understand this region. The skeleton of 
head and neck consists of skull, cervical vertebrae, and hyoid 
bone. The students should study the skull and cervical 
vertebrae thoroughly relating their main features to the bony 
points which can be felt in a living individual. The 
prominences and depressions on the bony surface are 
landmarks for attachments of the muscles, tendons, and 
ligaments. The openings in the bone are also landmarks 
where various nerves and blood vessels enter or exit.
SKULL
The bony skeleton of the head is termed skull. It consists of 
22 bones excluding ear ossicles. Except mandible (bone of 
lower jaw), all the bones of skull, joined together by sutures, 
are immobile and form the cranium. However, the two terms 
skull and cranium are generally used synonymously.
Parts of the Skull (Fig. 2.1)
The skull is subdivided into two parts:
An upper dome-shaped part which covers the cranial 
cavity containing brain is called cranial vault/calvaria/
brain box. It is attached to the skull base below. The 
calvaria along with skull base is called cranial skeleton/ 
cranium.
2. A lower anterior part is called facial skeleton, which 
includes mandible.
The cranium (cranial skeleton) is a strong and rigid 
container for the brain, while the facial skeleton is a 
rather fragile and light basis for face. The facial skeleton 
lies below the anterior part of the cranium in human 
beings.
Many anatomists use alternative terms, neurocranium for 
the cranial skeleton and viscerocranium for the facial 
skeleton.
Fig. 2.1 Skull showing cranial skeleton (orange color) and facial skeleton (yellow color): A, lateral view; B, frontal view.
Cranial skeleton
Facial skeleton
Cranial skeleton
Facial skeleton
--- Page 28 ---
Osteology of the Head and Neck
Functions of the Skull
The functions of the skull are:
1. Provides case for protection of the brain and its 
coverings (meninges).
2. Provides cavities for accommodation of organs of special 
senses such as sight, hearing, equilibration, smell, and 
taste.
3. Provides openings for the passage of air and food.
4. Accommodates teeth and jaws for mastication.
N.B. The term cranium (Gk. cranium = skull) is sometimes 
used to mean the skull without mandible.
BONES OF THE SKULL
The skull is made up of 22 bones, excluding ear ossicles.
1. Cranial skeleton, consisting of 8 bones, out of which 
two are paired and four unpaired
Paired bones 
Unpaired bones
• Parietal 
• Frontal
• Temporal 
• Occipital
• Sphenoid
• Ethmoid
2. Facial skeleton, consisting of 14 bones, out of which six 
are paired and two unpaired:
Paired bones 
Unpaired bones
• Maxilla 
• Mandible
• Zygomatic 
• Vomer
• Nasal
• Lacrimal
• Palatine
• Inferior nasal concha
JOINTS OF THE SKULL
The bones of the skull are united at immovable joints called 
sutures. The connective tissue uniting the bones is called 
sutural ligament. Exception to this rule is mandible for it is 
connected to the cranium by synovial temporomandibular 
joints, which are freely movable joints.
N.B. All the bones of the skull are immovable except for the 
mandible which permits free movements. The ear ossicles 
within the middle ear are also mobile, but conventionally 
they are not included in the skeleton of the head.
ANATOMICAL POSITION OF THE SKULL
It is the position of skull (Fig. 2.2) in which the orbital 
cavities are directed forwards, and lower margins (infraorbital 
margins) of the orbits and upper margins of external acoustic 
meatuses lie in the same horizontal plane (Frankfurt’s 
plane).
N.B. A horizontal line formed by joining the infraorbital 
margin and the center of external auditory meatus is called 
Reid’s baseline.
STUDY OF SKULL AS A WHOLE
The study of skull as a whole is of greater importance to 
most health professionals than the study of unnecessary 
details of the individual bones.
The skull can be studied from outside or from inside 
(after removing the calvaria or skull cap).
EXTERIOR OF THE SKULL
The external features of the skull are studied from five 
different aspects, viz.
1. Superior aspect (norma verticalis).
2. Posterior aspect (norma occipitalis).
3. Anterior aspect (norma frontalis).
4. Lateral aspect (norma lateralis).
5. Inferior aspect (norma basalis).
When the skull is viewed from superior aspect it is called 
norma verticalis; when from posterior view, norma 
occipitalis; when from anterior aspect, norma frontalis;
when from lateral aspect, norma lateralis; and when from 
inferior aspect, norma basalis.
Norma Verticalis (Fig. 2.3)
When the skull is viewed from above, it appears oval, being 
wider posteriorly than anteriorly.
It presents the following features:
Fig. 2.2 Anatomical position of the skull.
Upper
margin of
external
auditory
meatus
Center of external
auditory meatus
(auricular point)
Reid’s
baseline
Frankfurt’s
plane
Lower
margin of
orbit
(infraorbital
margin)
--- Page 29 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
Bones and Sutures
The bones are frontal, parietal, and occipital. They are 
located as follows:
1. Frontal bone (squamous part) anteriorly.
2. Parietal bones (paired) on each side of midline.
3. Occipital bone (squamous part) posteriorly.
These bones are united by the following three sutures.
1. Coronal suture (L. = a crown), between frontal and two 
parietal bones. It crosses the cranial vault from side-to-
side.
2. Sagittal suture (L. = an arrow), between two parietal 
bones. It lies in the median plane.
3. Lambdoid suture, between occipital and two parietal 
bones. It is shaped like the letter lambda, hence its 
name.
N.B.
• The metopic suture is occasionally present in the median 
plane of the frontal bone in 3–8% cases. It represents the 
remnants of suture between the two halves of the frontal 
bone in fetal skull, which develops by separate centres of 
ossification.
• Isolated sutural bones, ossified from separate centres are 
often seen along the lambdoidal suture.
Other Features
These are as follows:
1. Bregma: It is a point at which coronal and sagittal 
sutures meet.
2. Parietal eminence/tuber: It is an area of maximum 
convexity of parietal bone.
3. Vertex: It is the highest point on the skull. It lies on the 
sagittal suture near its middle and is situated a few 
centimeters behind the bregma.
4. Parietal foramen: It is a small foramen in parietal bone 
near sagittal suture, 2.5–4 cm in front of lambda.
5. Obelion: It is a point on sagittal suture between the two 
parietal foramina.
Norma Occipitalis (Fig. 2.4)
When the skull is viewed from behind, it appears convex 
upwards and on sides but flattened below.
It presents the following features:
Bones and Sutures
The bones seen in this view are posterior portions of pari-
etal bones, the upper part of occipital bone, and mastoid 
parts of temporal bones. They are located as follows:
1. Parietal bones, superiorly one on each side.
2. Occipital bone (squamous part), inferiorly.
3. Mastoid part of temporal bone, inferolaterally on each 
side.
Sagittal suture
Parietal
bone
Occipital
bone
Lambdoid suture
Parietomastoid
suture
Occipitomastoid
suture
External occipital
protuberance
Posterior margin of
foramen magnum
Mastoid foramen
Highest
Superior
Inferior
Mastoid process
Nuchal lines
External
occipital crest
Fig. 2.3 Norma verticalis.
Frontal bone
Metopic suture
Coronal suture
Bregma
Temporal line
Parietal foramen
Lambda
Wormian bone
Lambdoid suture
Parietal
bone
Occipital
bone
Obelion
Fig. 2.4 Norma occipitalis.
--- Page 30 ---
Osteology of the Head and Neck
Mental foramen
Mentum (mental protuberance)
Frontal bone
Frontozygomatic
suture
Whitnall’s tubercle
Orbital opening
Middle nasal
concha
Inferior nasal
concha
Frontal prominence
Superciliary arch
Supraorbital notch
Zygomatic bone
Infraorbital foramen
Anterior nasal spine
Alveolar process
of mandible
Alveolar process
of maxilla
Zygomaticofacial foramen
Nasion
Glabella
Anterior nasal
aperture
Fig. 2.5 Norma frontalis.
The sutures which unite these bones are as follows:
1. Lambdoid suture, between occipital and two parietal 
bones.
2. Occipitomastoid suture, between occipital and mastoid 
part of temporal bone.
3. Parietomastoid suture, between parietal and mastoid 
part of temporal bone.
Other Features
The other features to be noted on the posterior aspect of the 
skull are:
1. Lambda: It is the point at which sagittal and lambdoid 
sutures meet.
2. External occipital protuberance: It is a median bony 
projection about midway between the lambda and the 
foramen magnum. The most prominent point of the 
external occipital protuberance is called inion.
3. Superior nuchal lines: These are curved bony ridges 
passing laterally on each side from external occipital 
protuberance. In some cases curved faint bony ridges are 
seen 1 cm above the superior nuchal lines. They are 
called highest nuchal lines.
4. External occipital crest: It is a vertical ridge between the 
external occipital protuberance and posterior margin of 
the foramen magnum.
5. Inferior nuchal lines: These are curved bony ridges 
passing laterally on each side from middle of the external 
occipital crest.
6. Mastoid foramen: It is present near the occipitomastoid 
suture.
Norma Frontalis (Fig. 2.5)
In frontal view, the skull appears oval, being wider above 
and narrower below.
The anterior aspect of the skull presents the following 
features:
1. Frontal region formed by frontal bone.
2. Orbital openings.
3. Prominences of the cheek formed by zygomatic bones.
4. Bony external nose and anterior nasal aperture.
5. Upper and lower jaws bearing teeth.
Frontal region formed by frontal bone: The frontal region 
or the forehead is formed by the squamous part of the 
frontal bone. Below on each side of median plane, it 
articulates with the nasal bones. Frontal region presents the 
following features: superciliary arches, glabella, and frontal 
eminences. They are already described in Chapter 1.
Orbital openings: These are the openings of two orbital 
cavities on the face. Each opening is present above and lateral 
to the anterior nasal aperture. It is quadrangular in shape 
and presents four margins, viz. supraorbital, lateral, 
infraorbital, and medial.
1. The supraorbital margin is formed entirely by the 
frontal bone. At the junction of its lateral two-third and 
medial one-third, there is a notch called supraorbital 
notch (or foramen in some skulls), through which passes 
the supraorbital nerve and vessels.
The lateral orbital margin is formed by the frontal process 
of zygomatic bone and zygomatic process of frontal bone.
--- Page 31 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
3. The infraorbital margin is formed by the zygomatic 
bone laterally and the maxilla medially.
Below this margin the maxilla presents an opening 
called infraorbital foramen through which passes the 
infraorbital nerve and vessels.
4. The medial orbital margin is ill-defined as compared to 
other margins. It is formed by the frontal bone above 
and the anterior lacrimal crest of the maxilla below.
Prominences of the cheek formed by zygomatic bones (malar 
bones): Each prominence is situated on the lower and lateral 
side of the orbit and rests on the maxilla. It is marked by a 
foramen called zygomaticofacial foramen.
Bony external nose and anterior nasal aperture: The bony 
external nose is formed by the nasal bones and maxillae. It 
terminates in front and below as piriform aperture of the 
nose called anterior nasal aperture which is bounded above 
by the nasal bones, and laterally and below on each side by 
the nasal notches of the maxillae.
The two nasal bones articulate in the midline with each 
other at internasal suture, posteriorly with frontal process of 
maxilla and superiorly with frontal bone at the frontonasal 
suture. Anterior nasal spine is a sharp bony projection which 
marks the meeting of the two maxillae in the lower boundary 
of the anterior nasal aperture.
Upper and lower jaws: The upper jaw is formed by two 
maxillae. On the anterior aspect each maxilla presents:
(a) a zygomatic process, which extends laterally and articulate 
with the zygomatic bone,
(b) a frontal process, which projects upwards and articulates 
with the frontal bone,
(c) an alveolar process, which carries the upper teeth, and
(d) the anterior surface of the maxilla, which presents: nasal 
notch medially; infraorbital foramen 1 cm below the 
infraorbital margin; incisive fossa above the incisor 
teeth; canine fossa lateral to canine eminence produced 
by the root of canine tooth.
The lower jaw is formed by the mandible. The upper 
border, also called alveolar process of the mandible, carries 
the lower teeth (mandible is described in detail on 
page 24).
Bones and Sutures
As discussed, the following bones are seen when skull is 
viewed from the front:
1. Frontal bone, forming the forehead.
Nasal bones (right and left), forming the bridge of the nose.
3. Maxillae (right and left), forming the upper jaw.
4. Zygomatic bone (right and left), forming the malar 
prominences.
5. Mandible, forming the lower jaw.
The sutures seen in this view are as follows:
1. Frontonasal.
2. Internasal.
3. Frontomaxillary.
4. Zygomaticomaxillary.
Other Features
In addition to the above, the following features should be 
noted in the median plane and lateral regions of the anterior 
aspect of the skull:
1. In the median plane:
(a) Glabella, a median elevation above the nasion and 
between the superciliary arches.
(b) Nasion, a median point at the root of the nose where 
the internasal and frontonasal sutures meet.
(c) Anterior nasal spine, a sharp bony projection in the 
median plane, in the lower boundary of the piriform 
aperture.
(d) Symphysis menti, a median ridge joining two halves 
of the mandible.
(e) Mental protuberance, a triangular elevation at the 
lower end of symphysis menti.
(f) Mental point (gnathion), middle point of the base of 
the mandible.
2. In the lateral region (from above downwards):
(a) Frontal prominence, a low rounded elevation above 
the superciliary arch.
(b) Three foramina lying in same vertical plane, viz.
 
(i) Supraorbital notch or foramen, at the junction 
of medial one-third and lateral two-third of the 
superior orbital margin.
 
(ii) Infraorbital foramen, 1 cm below the infra-
orbital margin.
 
(iii) Mental foramen, below the interval between 
two premolar teeth.
(c) An oblique line on the body of the mandible, extending 
between mental tubercle and lower end of anterior 
margin of ramus of the mandible.
Norma Lateralis (Fig. 2.6)
When skull is viewed from its lateral aspect it presents the 
following features:
Bones and Sutures
The bones seen on the lateral aspect of skull are frontal, 
parietal, occipital, temporal, sphenoid, zygomatic, mandible, 
maxilla, and nasal.
The sutures seen on this aspect of the skull are as follows:
1. Coronal suture (discussed previously on page 14).
--- Page 32 ---
Osteology of the Head and Neck
2. Parietosquamosal 
suture, 
between 
parietal 
squamous part of temporal bones.
3. Lambdoid suture (discussed previously on page 14).
Other Features
The other features to be noted on the lateral aspect of the 
skull are as follows:
1. Temporal line: It commences at the frontal process of 
the zygomatic bone, arches upwards and backwards 
across the parietal bone where it splits into superior and 
inferior temporal lines. Traced behind, the superior 
temporal line fades away whereas prominent inferior 
temporal line curves downwards and forwards across 
the squamous part of the temporal bone as the 
supramastoid crest, which is continuous with the 
superior root of zygomatic process.
Zygomatic arch: It is a horizontal bar of bone formed by 
temporal process of zygomatic bone and zygomatic 
process of temporal bone. It presents two surfaces (outer 
and inner) and two borders (upper and lower). The 
upper border is continuous in front with the temporal 
line through posterosuperior border of the zygomatic 
bone, and behind with the supramastoid crest. The 
posterior end of lower border is marked by a tubercle 
called tubercle of root of zygoma. Here zygomatic process 
of temporal bone divides into anterior and posterior 
roots. The anterior root (articular tubercle) passes 
medially forming anterior boundary of mandibular fossa.
The posterior root forms lateral boundary of mandibular 
fossa and terminates behind into a small postglenoid 
tubercle.
3. External acoustic meatus: It is an opening just below the 
posterior root of the zygoma. Its anterior wall, floor, and 
lower part of the posterior wall are formed by tympanic 
part of the temporal bone, whereas its roof and upper 
part of the posterior wall are formed by the squamous 
part of the temporal bone.
4. Suprameatal triangle (triangle of McEwen; Fig. 2.19): It 
is a small depression posterosuperior to the external 
auditory meatus. It is bounded above by supramastoid 
crest in front by posterosuperior margin of external 
acoustic meatus and behind by a vertical tangent to the 
posterior margin of the meatus.
The mastoid antrum lies 1.25 cm deep to this triangle. 
A small bony projection called suprameatal spine (spine
of Henle) may be present in the anteroinferior part of 
this triangle.
5. Mastoid process: It is a mamma-like process of temporal 
bone extending downwards behind the meatus.
6. Asterion: It is a meeting point of parietomastoid, 
occipitomastoid, and lambdoid sutures.
7. Styloid process: It is a thin long bony process of 
temporal bone, anterolateral to the mastoid process 
below and behind the external auditory meatus. Its base 
is partly ensheathed by tympanic plate. It is directed 
downwards forwards and slightly medially.
8. Temporal fossa: It is a shallow depression on the side of 
the skull bounded above by the temporal line and 
below by zygomatic arch and supramastoid crest 
(laterally), and infratemporal crest of sphenoid 
(medially). It communicates with the infratemporal 
fossa through a gap between the zygomatic arch and 
the side of the skull.
The region in the anterior part of the temporal fossa 
where four bones (frontal, parietal, squamous temporal, 
Fig. 2.6 Norma lateralis.
Superior temporal line
Parietal bone
Opisthocranion
Lambda
Occipital bone
Inion
External auditory
meatus
Mastoid
process
Angle of
mandible
Mandible
Greater wing of sphenoid
Pterion
Glabella
Nasal bone
Zygomatic bone
Maxilla
Inferior temporal line
Vertex
Bregma
Temporal bone
Zygomatic arch
Posterosuperior border of 
zygomatic bone
Frontal bone
Supramastoid crest
Asterion
--- Page 33 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
Alveolar arch of maxilla
Greater palatine foramen
Lesser palatine foramina
Vomer
Foramen lacerum
Scaphoid fossa
Foramen ovale
Foramen spinosum
Spine of sphenoid
Carotid canal
Jugular foramen
Styloid process
Mastoid process
Stylomastoid foramen
Occipital condyle
Condylar canal/posterior
condylar canal
Foramen magnum
Inferior nuchal line
Superior nuchal line
External occipital
protuberance
Incisive canal
Pharyngeal tubercle
Hypoglossal canal
Articular fossa for
head of mandible
Lateral pterygoid
plate
Medial pterygoid
plate
Choanae
Zygomatic arch
Incisive fossa
Hard palate
Fig. 2.7 Pterion and extradural hematoma: A, relationship 
of anterior division middle meningeal artery to pterion; 
B, extradural hematoma. (Source: Fig. 6.37, Page 355, 
Clinical and Surgical Anatomy, 2e, Vishram Singh, Copyright 
Elsevier 2007, All rights reserved.)
and greater wing of the sphenoid) meet to form an 
H-shaped suture is called pterion. It is situated 4 cm 
above the midpoint of the zygomatic arch.
9. Infratemporal fossa: It is the region on the side skull, 
below the zygomatic arch. It is bounded medially by 
lateral pterygoid plate and laterally by ramus of the 
mandible. It is described in detail in Chapter 10.
10. Pterygomaxillary fissure: It is a triangular gap between 
the body of maxilla and lateral pterygoid plate of 
sphenoid. The infratemporal fossa communicates with 
the pterygopalatine fossa through this fissure. The 
pterygopalatine fossa is described in Chapter 10.
Fracture of pterion: The pterion overlies the anterior 
division of middle meningeal artery, which ruptures 
following a blow in this region to form an extradural 
hematoma [a clot formation between the skull bone and 
the dura mater (Fig. 2.7)]. The clot, if big, may compress 
the brain leading to unconsciousness or even death. 
Therefore, it should be removed as early as possible by 
trephination or craniotomy.
Clinical correlation
Norma Basalis (Fig. 2.8)
For the sake of convenience of study, the norma basalis 
(undersurface of the skull) is divided into three regions/
Fig. 2.8 Norma basalis.
Posterior division
of middle meningeal
artery
Middle
meningeal
artery
Pterion
Anterior division
of middle meningeal
artery
Extradural hematoma
Dura
--- Page 34 ---
Osteology of the Head and Neck
parts: anterior, middle, and posterior by two imaginary 
transverse lines, viz.:
1. Anterior transverse line, which passes along the 
posterior-free margin of the hard palate.
2. Posterior transverse line, which passes along the anterior 
margin of the foramen magnum.
Anterior Part of Norma Basalis
It is formed by hard palate and alveolar processes of the 
maxillae.
Features in the anterior part of norma basalis are as 
follows:
1. Alveolar arch: The alveolar processes of two maxillae 
forms a U-shaped ridge of bone called alveolar arch,
which bears the sockets for the roots of upper teeth.
Hard palate: It is formed by two pairs of bony processes: 
(a) palatine processes of maxillae in front (anterior 
two-third) and (b) horizontal plates of palatine bones 
behind (posterior one-third). The hard palate presents 
intermaxillary, interpalatine, and palatomaxillary sutures. 
The hard palate is described in detail in Chapter 14.
Middle Part of Norma Basalis
It extends from posterior margin of the hard palate to an 
imaginary transverse line that crosses the anterior margin of 
the foramen magnum.
Features in the middle part are as follows:
1. The median area: It presents –
(a) Posterior border of vomer: The two posterior nasal 
apertures (choanae) are separated by the posterior 
border of vomer.
(b) Broad bar of bone: It is formed by the fusion of the 
body of sphenoid and basilar part of the occipital 
bone. It is marked in the median plane by pharyngeal 
tubercle, a little in front of foramen magnum.
2. The lateral area: It presents –
(a) Pterygoid process: This process projects downwards 
from the junction between the body and greater 
wing of sphenoid behind last molar tooth. It divides 
into medial and lateral pterygoid plates, which are 
separated from each other by pterygoid fossa. Each 
plate has a free posterior border. The upper end of 
posterior border of medial pterygoid plate encloses 
a triangular depression called scaphoid fossa, and 
the lower end bears a hook-like process called 
pterygoid hamulus.
(b) Infratemporal surface of the greater wing of sphenoid:
It presents:
 
(i) Four margins, viz.
Anterior margin, forms the posterior margin 
of inferior orbital fissure.
Anterolateral margin, forms the infra-
temporal crest.
Posterolateral margin, articulates with the 
squamous part of temporal bone.
Posteromedial margin, articulates with 
petrous part of temporal bone.
 
(ii) Four foramina, all located along the postero-
medial margin, viz.
Foramen spinosum, a small circular foramen 
at the base of spine of sphenoid.
Foramen ovale, a large oval foramen 
anterolateral to the upper end of the posterior 
border of the lateral pterygoid plate.
Emissary sphenoidal foramen (foramen of 
Vesalius), a small foramen sometimes 
present between the foramen ovale and 
the scaphoid fossa.
Canaliculus innominatus, a very small 
foramen present between foramen ovale 
and spinosum. The structures passing 
through the above foramina are described 
in Chapter 21.
 
(iii) Spine of sphenoid, is a small sharp bony 
projection posterolateral to the foramen 
spinosum.
Fracture/necrosis of spine of sphenoid: Two nerves are 
related to the spine of sphenoid: auriculotemporal nerve on 
its lateral aspect and chorda tympani on its medial aspect. 
Both these nerves carry secretomotor fibres to salivary 
glands—the auriculotemporal nerve to the parotid and 
chorda tympani to the submandibular and sublingual 
salivary glands. 
Both these nerves would be damaged following fracture or 
necrosis of the spine. This will result in decreased salivation 
and loss of taste sensations in the anterior two-third of the 
tongue.
Clinical correlation
(c) Sulcus tubae (groove for auditory tube): It is a groove 
between the posterolateral margin of greater wing of 
the sphenoid and petrous temporal bone. It lodges 
the cartilaginous part of the auditory tube.
(d) Inferior surface of the petrous temporal bone: It is 
triangular and presents an apex, which forms its 
anteromedial end. The apex is perforated by upper 
end of carotid canal and separated from the 
sphenoid by foramen lacerum.
(e) Downward edge of tegmen tympani: It divides the 
squamous tympanic fissure into petrotympanic and 
petrosquamous parts.
--- Page 35 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
Fig. 2.9 Enlarged view of base of skull to show the features lying in the same imaginary transverse lines.
Foramen
magnum
Occipital
condyle
Mastoid
notch
Tympanic
canaliculus
Carotid canal
Lateral pterygoid
plate
Medial pterygoid
plate
Choanae
Posterior nasal
spine
Alveolar arch
Vomer
Foramen lacerum
Foramen ovale
Foramen spinosum
Spine of sphenoid
Styloid process
Jugular foramen
Mastoid process
Stylomastoid
foramen
Hypoglossal canal
(anterior condylar
canal)
Posterior
condylar canal
Posterior Part of Norma Basalis
It is behind the imaginary transverse line passing along the 
anterior margin of the foramen magnum.
Features in the posterior part are as follows:
1. The median area presents the following structures from 
backwards:
(a) Foramen magnum
(b) External occipital crest
(c) External occipital protuberance
2. The lateral area presents:
(a) Occipital condyles: These are oval condylar processes, 
one on each side of foramen magnum.
(b) Hypoglossal canal: It is located anterosuperior to 
occipital condyle.
(c) Condylar fossa: It is small fossa located behind the 
occipital condyle. Sometimes it is perforated by a 
canal called condylar (posterior condylar) canal.
(d) Jugular process of occipital bone: It lies lateral to 
occipital condyle and forms the posterior boundary 
of jugular foramen.
(e) Jugular foramen: It is a large elongated foramen at 
the posterior end of the petro-occipital suture. Its 
anterior wall is hollowed out to form the jugular 
fossa.
(f) Tympanic canaliculus: It opens on the thin edge of 
the bone between the jugular fossa and the lower 
end of the carotid canal.
(g) Stylomastoid foramen: It is situated posterior to the 
root of the styloid process.
N.B. It is interesting to note that foramen ovale, foramen 
lacerum, and line of fusion of the body of the sphenoid with 
basilar part of occipital bone lie in same transverse line 
(Fig. 2.9). Similarly, anterior border of mastoid process, 
stylomastoid foramen, jugular foramen, and hypoglossal 
canal lie in the same transverse line (Fig. 2.9).
DIFFERENCES BETWEEN MALE AND
FEMALE SKULLS
The sex-related differences of the skull are enumerated in 
Table 2.1.
Table 2.1 Features of male and female skulls
Male
Female
Bones
Thicker and heavier
Thinner and lighter
Cranial capacity
More
Less
Muscular markings 
and ridges
Well-marked, hence 
seen prominently
Not well-marked
Superciliary arches
Prominent
Not prominent
Mastoid process
Prominent
Less prominent
Frontal and parietal 
tubers
Less prominent
Prominent
CRANIOMETRY
To compare skulls of different races and species, the physical 
anthropologists take various measurements of the skull. This 
process is called craniometry.
Cranial Points
The different points on the skull which are commonly used 
for taking measurements are as follows:
--- Page 36 ---
Osteology of the Head and Neck
In the midline:
1. Gnathion: the midpoint of the chin at lower border of 
the mandible.
2. Prosthion: lowest point on the upper jaw between the 
central incisors.
3. Acanthion: anterior nasal spine.
4. Nasion: junction of nasal and frontal bones.
5. Glabella: midpoint at the level of superciliary arches.
6. Bregma: junction of coronal and sagittal sutures.
7. Lambda: junction of sagittal and lambdoid sutures.
8. Opisthocranion (occipital point): the most posteriorly 
projecting point on the occipital bone.
9. Inion: tip of external occipital protuberance.
10. Opisthion: central point on the posterior edge of the 
foramen magnum.
11. Basion: central point on the anterior edge of the foramen 
magnum.
At the side of the skull:
1. Pterion: region where frontal, parietal, greater wing of 
sphenoid, and squamous part of temporal bones meet.
2. Dacryon: junction of lacrimomaxillary and fronto-
maxillary sutures.
3. Gonion: outer side of the angle of the mandible.
4. Porion: point on the posterior root of the zygomatic 
arch above the middle of the upper border of external 
auditory meatus.
5. Asterion: region where occipital, parietal, and temporal 
bones meet.
The calvarial part of skull is measured as follows:
 Maximal cranial length: From centre of glabella to 
opisthocranion
 Maximus cranial breadth: Greatest breadth at right angle 
to the median plane
 Cranial height: From basion to bregma
The cephalic index is calculated as under:
Maximum cranial breadth × 100
Maximum cranial length
N.B.
• If maximum width of cranium is less than 75% of its 
maximum length, it is called dolichocephalic skull (long 
headed individual).
• If maximum width of cranium is more than 80% of its 
maximum length it is called brachycephalic skull (broad 
headed individual).
• If ratio between maximum width of cranium and maximum 
length of cranium is between 75% and 80%, it is called 
mesaticephalic.
NEWBORN SKULL
The striking feature of the newborn skull is the huge size of 
its cranium and relatively small size of its facial skeleton. In 
newborn, the facial skeleton forms about 1/7th of the 
cranium. The facial skeleton is small and consists of tiny 
collection of bones, clustered under the anterior part of the 
cranium (Fig. 2.10).
Fig. 2.10 Fetal skull to show the location of fontanelles: A, lateral aspect; B, superior aspect.
Frontal bone
Frontal eminence
Maxilla
Mandible
Tympanic ring
Stylomastoid foramen
Occipital bone
Parietal
eminence
Parietal bone
Mastoid (posterolateral)
fontanelle
Sphenoidal (anterolateral)
fontanelle
Parietal eminence
Posterior fontanelle
Frontal bone
Anterior fontanelle
Parietal bone
Occipital bone
--- Page 37 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
The huge size of the cranium is due to fast development 
of the brain. The brain reaches 25% of its adult size at birth 
and 75% by the age of 4 years.
The size of facial skeleton at birth is due to rudimentary 
stage of the mandible and maxillae, non-eruption of teeth 
and the small size of the maxillary air sinuses and the nasal 
cavity.
The following features of the newborn skull are clinically 
important:
1. Fontanelles: The bones of vault of skull are ossified in 
membrane. At birth, it is partly ossified and six unossified 
areas are seen between the bones which are called 
fontanelles (Fig. 2.10).
The fontanelles serve two important purposes, viz.
(a) Permits some overlapping of the skull bones 
(moulding) during childbirth.
(b) Permits growth of the brain.
Number of fontanelles: There are six fontanelles at birth situ-
ated at the four angles of the parietal bones. Two are, there-
fore, median (anterior and posterior) and four are lateral 
two (sphenoidal and mastoid) on each side. The anterior 
fontanelle is situated at the place where the two parietal 
bones and the two halves of the frontal bone come close 
together. It is largest and diamond shaped. It measures about 
3–8 cm in length and 2–5 cm in breadth. 
The posterior fontanelle is situated at the junction of the 
sagittal and lambdoid sutures. It is triangular in shape.
sphenoidal 
(anterolateral) 
mastoid
(posterolateral) fontanelles are situated at the sphenoid 
and mastoid angles of parietal bones. They are small and 
irregular. Posterior fontanelle closes soon after birth, 
lateral fontanelles close within a few weeks of birth and 
anterior fontanelle closes by 2 years of age.
N.B. All fontanelles close around birth except anterior 
fontanelle which closes by two years of age.
The anterior fontanelle is largest and of great clinical 
significance. The degree of tenseness of the membrane 
gives an index of the intracranial pressure. An abnormal 
depression of membrane indicates dehydration (insufficiency 
of the body fluids). Further, the anterior fontanelle permits 
an access to the superior sagittal sinus as it lies just 
underneath it in the midline. Through its lateral angle a 
needle may be passed into the lateral ventricle of the brain.
Clinical correlation
2. Tympanic cavity (middle ear cavity) and mastoid 
process: The tympanum is a well-developed cavity at 
birth. The mastoid process does not begin to develop 
until the end of the second year. Before the mastoid 
process develops, the facial nerve is a subcutaneous 
structure and is in danger of being cut by an incision 
behind the ear, if it extends too far down. In adult, it is 
2.5–3.8 cm from the surface, being pushed to the base of 
the skull by the development of mastoid process. In 
infants, the middle ear cavity is separated from temporal 
lobe of brain only by a thin strip of cartilage, uniting the 
squamous and petrous parts of temporal bone. This 
cartilaginous strip is very thin and lies underneath the 
dura mater and temporal lobe of the brain. Therefore, 
infection of middle ear may spread through this cartilage 
to cause an extradural or temporal lobe abscess.
3. Paranasal air sinuses:
(a) Frontal air sinus does not exist at birth. It begins to 
develop during the first year and reaches its full 
development between 15th and 20th year.
(b) Maxillary air sinus is rudimentary at birth. It reaches 
its full development between 15th and 20th year.
4. Mandible: At birth, mandible is in two halves, united by 
the fibrous tissue at the symphysis menti.
5. Frontal bone: At birth, frontal bone is in two halves, 
united by the fibrous tissue in the midline. If it persists 
in the adult, it is called metopic suture.
6. Basiocciput and basisphenoid: Both these are united by 
a piece of hyaline cartilage (synchondrosis). It is 
responsible for growth of skull in length.
N.B. All the bones of the skull are in the process of 
ossification at birth except styloid process and the 
perpendicular plate of ethmoid.
Sutural (Wormian) Bones
These are small irregular bones found in the sutures. They 
are formed by additional ossification centres that may occur 
in or near sutures. They are most numerous in the lambdoid 
suture. Sometimes they occur at fontanelles, especially in 
lambdoidal and mastoid fontanelles. In lambdoidal 
fontanelle they may represent interparietal bone. An 
independent bone at lambda is called Inca bone or Goethe’s 
ossicle. In the adult skull they are most common at the 
lambda and at the asterion. Rarely they may be seen at 
pterion (epipteric bone) and at bregma (os Kerckring). The 
wormian bones are common in hydrocephalic skulls.
N.B. The sutural bones are usually small and bilateral. The 
inca bone was common in the skull of Incas and is still 
present in their Andean descendants.
STRUCTURES PASSING THROUGH VARIOUS
FORAMINA, CANALS, AND FISSURES 
OF THE SKULL
The total number of normal openings (foramina, canals, and 
fissures) in the skull is around 85, which provide passage to
--- Page 38 ---
Osteology of the Head and Neck
various nerves and vessels. Some of these are of little 
significance as they provide passage to minor neurovascular 
structures of no clinical significance. Attention should, 
therefore, be paid to those openings which provide passage 
to major neurovascular structures such as openings for 
(a) spinal cord and vertebral arteries, i.e., foramen magnum, 
(b) internal jugular vein, i.e., jugular foramen, and 
(c) internal carotid artery, i.e., carotid canal.
In the Basis Cranii Interna (Internal Surface of the Base of 
Skull/Cranial Fossae)
The structures passing through various foramina in the 
cranial fossae are described in Chapter 21.
In the Basis Cranii External/Norma Basalis (Inferior 
Aspect of the Skull)
Lateral Incisive Foramina
They are two in number, right and left—present in the lateral 
wall of the incisive fossa and lead to the floor of the nasal 
cavity through incisive canal. They transmit:
1. Greater palatine vessels (terminal parts).
2. Nasopalatine nerve (terminal part): only when the 
median incisive foramina are absent.
Median Incisive Foramina
They are two in number, one present in the anterior and 
another in the posterior wall of the incisive fossa. They 
transmit:
1. Left nasopalatine nerve: passes through the one present 
in the anterior wall of the incisive fossa.
2. Right nasopalatine nerve: passes through the one present 
in the posterior wall of the incisive fossa.
Greater Palatine Foramen
One, on each side, located in the posterolateral angle of hard 
palate. It transmits:
1. Greater palatine nerves.
2. Greater palatine vessels.
Squamotympanic Fissure
Present between tympanic part (plate) of temporal bone and 
squamous part of temporal bone (mandibular fossa), it is 
divided by a down-turned part of tegmen tympani (a part of 
petrous temporal bone) into petrotympanic and petrosqua-
mous fissures.
1. Petrotympanic fissure transmits:
(a) Chorda tympani nerve: a branch of facial nerve.
(b) Anterior tympanic artery: a branch of the first part of 
the maxillary artery.
(c) Anterior ligament of the malleus.
2. Petrosquamous fissure: no structure passes through it.
Palatovaginal Canal
Present between upper surface of sphenoidal process of 
palatine bone and lower surface of vaginal process of root of 
medial pterygoid plate (Fig. 2.26). It transmits:
1. Pharyngeal nerve: a branch from the pterygopalatine 
ganglion.
2. Pharyngeal artery: a branch of the third part of the 
maxillary artery.
Vomerovaginal Canal
Present between lower aspect of ala of vomer and upper 
aspect of vaginal process of root of medial pterygoid plate.
If present, it provides passage to:
1. Pharyngeal nerve: a branch from the pterygopalatine 
ganglion.
2. Pharyngeal artery: a branch of the third part of the 
maxillary artery.
Pterygoid Canal
Present in pterygoid process of the sphenoid bone connecting 
anterior wall of foramen lacerum to pterygopalatine fossa. It 
transmits:
1. Nerve of pterygoid canal (Vidian’s nerve).
2. Vessels of the pterygoid canal.
Foramen Ovale
Foramen Spinosum
Emissary Sphenoidal Foramen  Described in Chapter 21
Foramen Lacerum
Carotid Canal
Located on inferior surface of the petrous temporal bone. It 
transmits:
1. Internal carotid artery with sympathetic plexus around 
2. Internal carotid venous plexus connecting cavernous 
sinus and internal jugular vein.
3. Emissary vein connecting pharyngeal venous plexus and 
cavernous sinus.
Tympanic Canaliculus
Located on bony crest between carotid canal and jugular 
fossa and transmits:
Tympanic branch of glossopharyngeal (Jacobson’s nerve).
Mastoid Canaliculus (Arnold’s Canal)
Present in the lateral wall of the jugular fossa and transmits.
1. Auricular branch of vagus nerve (Alderman’s nerve/
Arnold’s nerve).
--- Page 39 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
Stylomastoid Foramen
Located between the roots of styloid and mastoid 
processes, at the anterior end of mastoid notch. It 
transmits:
1. Seventh cranial (facial) nerve.
Stylomastoid artery, a branch of posterior auricular artery.
Foramen Magnum
Hypoglossal (Anterior Condylar) Canal 
Described in
Jugular Foramen 
Chapter 21
In the Norma Occipitalis (Posterior Aspect of the Skull)
Mastoid Foramen
Present on the posterior aspect of mastoid process near the 
occipitomastoid suture. It transmits:
1. Emissary vein, connecting the posterior auricular vein 
with transverse sinus.
In the Norma Lateralis (Lateral Aspect of the Skull)
Zygomaticotemporal Foramen
Present on the posteromedial surface of the zygomatic bone 
and transmits:
1. Zygomaticotemporal nerve.
2. Zygomaticotemporal artery.
Pterygomaxillary Fissure
Present between lateral pterygoid plate and posterior surface 
of the maxilla and transmits:
1. Third part of the maxillary artery: from infratemporal 
fossa to the pterygopalatine fossa.
2. Maxillary nerve: second division of the 5th cranial nerve 
(V2).
Sphenopalatine Foramen
Present in the roof of sphenopalatine fossa and transmits:
1. Nasopalatine nerve.
2. Sphenopalatine vessels.
Greater Palatine Canal
Present on either side between the palatine bone and maxilla. 
It transmits greater palatine nerve and vessels.
In the Norma Verticalis
Parietal Foramen
Present on the parietal bone near sagittal suture and 
transmits emissary vein, connecting superficial veins of the 
scalp to the superior sagittal sinus.
In the Norma Frontalis
Supraorbital Foramen/Notch
Present on the supraorbital margin and transmits:
1. Supraorbital nerve, a branch of frontal nerve which in 
turn is a branch of ophthalmic division of the 5th cranial 
nerve.
2. Supraorbital vessels.
3. Frontal diploic vein.
Superior Orbital Fissure
See page 346 Chapter 21.
Inferior Orbital Fissure
Present at the junction between floor and lateral wall of the 
orbit. It transmits:
1. Maxillary nerve.
2. Infraorbital vessels.
3. Zygomatic nerve.
4. Vein connecting inferior ophthalmic vein with pterygoid 
venous plexus.
Infraorbital Foramen
Present on the anterior aspect of maxilla, below the 
infraorbital margin and transmits:
1. Infraorbital nerve: continuation of maxillary nerve.
2. Infraorbital artery: continuation of maxillary artery.
3. Infraorbital vein.
Zygomatico-orbital Foramen
Present on the orbital surface of zygomatic bone and 
transmits zygomatic branch of the maxillary nerve.
Mental Foramen
Present on the external aspect of body of mandible below the 
interval between premolar teeth and transmits:
1. Mental nerve: a branch of inferior alveolar nerve.
2. Mental artery: a branch of inferior alveolar artery.
3. Mental vein: a tributary of inferior alveolar vein.
STUDY OF INDIVIDUAL SKULL BONES
The following account is intended to provide the salient 
features of individual skull bones which are frequently asked 
in an oral examination.
MANDIBLE
The mandible is the bone of the lower jaw. It is the largest, 
strongest, and lowest bone of the face and bears the lower 
teeth.
--- Page 40 ---
Osteology of the Head and Neck
Parts
The mandible is horseshoe-shaped and consists of three 
parts: a horizontally-oriented body and two vertically- 
oriented rami (Figs 2.11 and 2.12).
Body
The body of the mandible is U-shaped and it presents:
1. Two surfaces
(a) External surface.
(b) Internal surface.
2. Two borders
(a) Superior border of the body is called alveolar process. 
It bears sockets of lower 16 teeth.
(b) Inferior border or base of the mandible presents a 
small depression (digastric fossa) on either side 
near the median plane. It gives attachment to the 
anterior belly of the digastric.
Features on the external and internal surfaces of the body:
The outer surface of the body of the mandible presents the 
following features:
1. Symphysis menti (mentum = chin): It is a faint median 
ridge on the external surface of the body. It marks the 
line of fusion of the two halves of the mandible at the 
age of 2 years. The symphysis menti expands below into 
a triangular elevation termed mental protuberance. It 
forms the point of chin, the base of which is limited on 
each side by the mental tubercle. The inner aspect of 
symphysis menti possesses four tubercles called genial
tubercles (mental spines) arranged into two pairs: 
upper and lower. The upper pair provides attachment to 
genioglossus muscles and lower pair to geniohyoid 
muscles.
2. Mental foramen: It lies below the interval between the 
premolar teeth and provides passage to mental nerve 
and vessels.
3. Oblique line: It is the continuation of the anterior 
border of the ramus. It runs downwards and forwards 
towards the mental tubercle.
4. Incisive fossa: It is a shallow depression just below the 
incisor teeth.
The internal surface of the body in each half of the 
mandible presents the following features:
Fig. 2.11 Mandible: A, anterior view; B, posterior view.
Head
Coronoid
process
Retromolar
fossa
Mental foramen
Symphysis menti
Mental tubercle
Mental
protuberance
(mentum)
Incisive fossa
Oblique line
Neck
Coronoid
process
Submandibular
fossa
Digastric fossa
Sublingual fossa
Mandibular
foramen
Mylohyoid
groove
Mylohyoid line
Genial tubercles
(mental spines)
Head
Neck
Pterygoid
fovea
Angle of
mandible
Oblique line
Mental tubercle
Mental
protuberance
Mental foramen
Retromolar fossa
Coronoid process
Mandibular notch
Pterygoid fovea
Neck
Mandibular
foramen
Rough area for
medial pterygoid
Mylohyoid groove
Submandibular fossa
Mylohyoid line
Digastric fossa
Genial tubercles
Lingula
Sublingual fossa
Coronoid process
Fig. 2.12 Right half of the mandible: A, external aspect; 
B, internal aspect.
--- Page 41 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
1. Mylohyoid line is a prominent oblique ridge that runs 
obliquely downwards and forwards from behind the 3rd 
molar tooth (about 1 cm below the alveolar border) to 
the symphysis menti below the genial tubercles.
2. Mylohyoid groove lies below the posterior end of the 
mylohyoid line. Mylohyoid nerve and vessels run in this 
groove.
3. Sublingual fossa is a shallow area above the anterior part 
of the mylohyoid line and lodges sublingual gland.
4. Submandibular fossa is a slightly hollowed out area 
below the posterior part of the mylohyoid line and 
lodges submandibular gland.
The other features on the inner and outer surfaces of the 
mandible are shown in Figures 2.11 and 2.12.
Muscles attached on the body of the mandible (Fig. 2.13):
The various muscles attached to the body of the mandible 
are as follows:
1. Buccinator: arises from oblique line below the three 
molar teeth.
2. Mylohyoid: arises from mylohyoid line.
3. Genioglossus: arises from superior genital tubercle.
4. Geniohyoid: arises from inferior genital tubercle.
5. Anterior belly of digastrics: arises from digastric fossa 
on the base of mandible close to symphysis menti.
6. Platysma: inserted into the base.
7. Superior constrictor: arises from the area above the 
posterior end of the mylohyoid line.
Ramus of the Mandible
It is more or less a quadrilateral vertical plate of bone that 
projects upwards from the posterior part of the body. 
Features
The ramus presents the following features:
1. Two surfaces, viz.
(a) Lateral surface.
(b) Medial surface.
2. Four borders, viz.
(a) Anterior.
(b) Superior (it is notched to form mandibular notch).
(c) Inferior.
(d) Posterior.
3. Two processes, viz.
(a) Condylar process, a strong upward projection from 
posterosuperior part. Its upper end is expanded to 
form head. Neck is the constricted part below head 
and presents a depression on its anterior surface 
called pterygoid fovea.
(b) Coronoid process, a flattened (side to side) triangular 
projection from anterosuperior part.
Angle of the Mandible
The meeting point between posterior and inferior borders of 
the ramus of mandible is called the angle of the mandible.
The features on the medial and lateral surfaces of the 
ramus of the mandible are shown in Figure 2.12.
The lateral surface of ramus is flat and bears a number of 
oblique ridges produced by masseter muscle.
The medial surface of the ramus presents the following 
features:
1. Mandibular foramen: It is located a little above the 
centre of ramus and leads into mandibular canal which 
runs downwards and forwards into the body to open on 
its external surface as mental foramen. It provides 
passage to:
Fig. 2.13 Muscle attached to the mandible: A, lateral surface of the right half of the mandible; B, inner surface of left half of 
the mandible (GG = genioglossus, GH = geniohyoid).
Masseter
Temporalis
Buccinator
Lateral pterygoid
Temporalis
Superior
constrictor
Medial
pterygoid
Mylohyoid
Anterior
belly of
digastric
Platysma
Depressor
anguli oris
Depressor
labii inferioris
Pterygomandibular
--- Page 42 ---
Osteology of the Head and Neck
(a) Inferior alveolar nerve: a branch of the posterior 
division of the mandibular nerve.
(b) Inferior alveolar artery: a branch from the 1st part of 
the maxillary artery.
(c) Inferior alveolar vein.
2. Lingula is a small tongue-shaped projection on the 
anterior margin of the mandibular foramen.
3. Mylohyoid groove begins just below the mandibular 
foramen and runs downwards and forwards to reach the 
body of mandible below the posterior part of mylohyoid 
line.
Muscles Attached to the Ramus of the 
Mandible (Fig. 2.13)
All the muscles of mastication are attached (inserted) into 
the ramus of mandible as under:
1. Masseter is inserted into the outer surface of the ramus.
2. Temporalis is inserted into the coronoid process on this 
tip, anterior border, and inner surface.
3. Lateral pterygoid is inserted into the pterygoid fovea 
present in front of the neck of the mandible.
4. Medial pterygoid is inserted into the inner surface of the 
ramus above the angle of the mandible.
Ligaments Attached to the Mandible (Fig. 2.14)
The following ligaments are attached to the mandible:
1. Stylomandibular ligament is attached to the angle of the 
mandible.
2. Temporomandibular ligament is attached to the lateral 
aspect of the neck of the mandible.
3. Sphenomandibular ligament is attached to the lingula 
of the mandible.
4. Pterygomandibular raphe/ligament is attached behind 
the last molar tooth to the upper end of mylohyoid line.
Nerves Related to the Mandible (Fig. 2.14)
The following nerves are related to the mandible:
1. Lingual nerve runs on the inner surface of the body 
close to the medial side of the root of the 3rd molar 
tooth.
2. Inferior alveolar nerve enters the mandibular foramen, 
and passes through the mandibular canal.
3. Mylohyoid nerve runs in the mylohyoid groove.
4. Mental nerve comes out of the mental foramen.
5. Nerve to masseter (masseteric nerve) runs through the 
mandibular notch.
6. Auriculotemporal runs to the medial side of the neck.
Marginal mandibular nerve across the lower border of 
the mandible.
Differences between Males and Females Mandibles
These are enumerated in Table 2.2.
Table 2.2 Differences between male and female mandibles
Features
Male mandible
Female mandible
Size
Larger and thicker
Smaller and
thinner
Height of the body
Greater
Lesser
Angle of mandible
Everted
Inverted
Chin
Quadrilateral
Rounded
Inferior border of 
body of mandible
Irregular
Smooth
Condyles
Larger
Smaller
Fig. 2.14 Attachment of ligaments and nerves related to the mandible: A, lateral surface of the right half of the mandible; 
B, medial surface of the left half of the mandible.
Lateral
ligament of TMJ
Masseteric
nerve
Auriculotemporal
nerve
Inferior alveolar
nerve
Mental
nerve
Sphenomandibular ligament
Pterygomandibular ligament
Lingual nerve
Stylomandibular
ligament
Stylomandibular
ligament
Mylohyoid
nerve
Marginal
mandibular
nerve
--- Page 43 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
Changes in the Position of Mental Foramen with Age
These are as follows:
1. At birth, it is present below the sockets for deciduous 
molar teeth near the lower border.
2. In an adult, it gradually moves upwards and opens 
midway between the upper and lower borders.
3. In old age, it lies close to alveolar border due to 
resorption of alveolar process of the mandible due to 
loss of teeth.
Age Changes in the Mandible (Fig. 2.15)
The important distinguishing features of mandible in 
different age groups are listed in Table 2.3.
N.B.
• The two halves of mandible fuse during the first year of 
life.
• In infants and children, the body of mandible is mainly 
made up of alveolar part containing sockets for both 
deciduous and permanent teeth.
• In adults, alveolar and subalveolar parts of the body of 
the mandible are equally developed.
• In old age, teeth usually fall out and alveolar border is 
absorbed so that the height of the body is markedly 
reduced.
Fractures of the mandible: The mandible occupies a 
prominent and exposed position of the facial skeleton; 
hence it is commonly fractured following violent injuries.
Sites of the fracture: The mandible tends to fracture at 
one of the three sites (Fig. 2.16):
(a) At the neck of the mandible, as this is the weakest part 
of the bone.
(b) At the angle of the mandible, because here abrupt 
curvature concentrates the force of the blow.
(c) In the canine region of the body, because elongated 
root of canine tooth reduces the bony substance and 
makes the mandible weaker at this site. The canine 
region is the commonest site of the fracture.
Clinical correlation
Fig. 2.15 Age-related changes in the mandible.
140°
Child
Adult
110°
Old age
140°
Fig. 2.16 Sites of the mandibular fracture: A, neck of the 
mandible; B, angle of the mandible; C, canine region.
Table 2.3 Distinguishing features of mandible in different 
age groups
Features
In children
In adult
In old age
Mental 
foramen
Present close 
to the inferior 
border of the 
body
Present midway 
between the 
upper and 
lower borders 
of the body
Present close 
to the upper 
border
Angle of 
mandible
140°
110°
140°
Relationship 
between 
condylar and 
coronoid 
processes
Coronoid 
process above 
the level of 
condylar 
process
Condylar 
process projects 
above the level 
of coronoid 
process
Coronoid 
process 
projects above 
the level of 
condylar 
process
Mandibular 
canal
Runs near the 
lower border
Runs parallel 
with the 
mylohyoid line
Runs close to 
the upper 
border
--- Page 44 ---
Osteology of the Head and Neck
N.B. A fracture of the mandible usually involves two 
fractures one in each half of the mandible, viz. fracture neck 
of mandible on one side and fracture of body in canine 
region on the other side.
Ossification of the Mandible
The mandible is formed by both intramembranous and 
endochondral ossification.
 Part of the mandible between mental and mandibular 
foramina ossifies in membrane from mesenchymal sheath 
of Meckel’s cartilage (first arch cartilage).
 Part of the m andible medial to mental foramen 
ossifies directly from Meckel’s cartilage (endochondral 
ossification).
 Coronoid and condylar processes ossify from secondary 
cartilages not related to Meckel’s cartilage.
N.B.
• The mandible is the second bone to ossify in the body. 
The centre in the mesenchymal sheath of Meckel’s 
cartilage appears during the 7th week of intrauterine life.
• The other centres forming the mandible appear during 
the 10th week of intrauterine life.
• At birth, mandible consists of two halves connected at 
the symphysis menti by cartilaginous nodules (mental 
ossicles). The bony union starts from below upwards 
during the 1st year of the age and completed at the end 
of the 2nd year.
MAXILLA
There are two maxillae, one on each side of midline 
(Fig. 2.17). The two together form the upper jaw. They are 
irregular pneumatic bones.
Fig. 2.17 Right maxilla: A, lateral aspect; B, medial aspect.
Infraorbital groove
Posterolateral
surface
Opening for
alveolar canal
Tuberosity
Frontal process
Anterior lacrimal crest
Lacrimal groove
Nasal notch
Anterior nasal spine
Infraorbital foramen
Anterior surface
Canine eminence
Incisive fossa
Canine fossa
Ethmoidal crest
Atrium of middle
meatus
Conchal crest
Inferior meatus
Anterior nasal
spine
Palatine process
Nasolacrimal groove
Maxillary hiatus
Greater palatine
canal
For perpendicular
plate of palatine
Alveolar process
Orbital surface
--- Page 45 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
Parts of the Maxilla
The maxilla is the second largest bone of the face. It consists 
of five parts: a body and four processes.
Body of the Maxilla
It is pyramidal in shape and contains a large cavity inside 
called maxillary air sinus.
The body presents the following four surfaces:
1. Nasal (medial) surface
2. Orbital (superior) surface
3. Infratemporal (posterior) surface
4. Anterior (facial) surface
1. Nasal surface (base): It forms the lateral wall of the nasal 
cavity and represents the base of the body of maxilla. It 
presents a large opening, the maxillary hiatus, which 
leads into maxillary sinus, a large air space within the 
body of the maxilla.
The maxillary hiatus is the most prominent feature of 
the nasal surface. In the articulated skull the maxillary 
hiatus is reduced in size by the four bones, viz. ethmoid, 
lacrimal, inferior nasal concha and palatine (for details 
see Chapter 17, page 262).
In front of the hiatus is the nasolacrimal groove. It is 
converted into nasolacrimal canal by lacrimal bone and 
inferior nasal concha.
An oblique ridge present in front of the nasolacrimal 
groove is called conchal crest. It articulates with the infe-
rior nasal concha.
A vertical groove, running obliquely in the posterior 
part of nasal surface is converted into greater palatine 
canal by a perpendicular plate of the palatine bone.
2. Orbital surface: It forms the major part of the floor of 
the orbital cavity. It presents infraorbital groove and 
canal for infraorbital nerve and vessels.
3. Infratemporal surface: It forms the anterior boundary 
of infratemporal fossa. It is separated from the anterior 
surface by zygomatic process and bony ridge (jugular 
crest) that ascends to it from first molar socket. It 
presents few minute foramina for posterior superior 
alveolar nerve and vessels.
4. Anterior surface: It forms the part of norma frontalis. 
About 1 cm below the infraorbital margin, the anterior 
surface presents the infraorbital foramen which transmits 
infraorbital nerve and vessels. Just above the alveolar 
process the anterior surface presents from medial to 
lateral: incisive fossa, canine eminence, and canine fossa. 
The canine eminence is caused by the root of canine 
tooth.
Processes of the Maxilla
Maxilla possesses the following four processes:
1. Frontal process
2. Zygomatic process
3. Palatine process
4. Alveolar process
1. Frontal process: It projects upwards and articulates with 
the frontal bone. The thick frontal process lies in the line 
of buttress for dispersion of force of impact from teeth 
to the base of the skull.
Its lateral surface is divided into anterior and 
posterior parts by a vertical ridge called anterior 
lacrimal crest. The posterior part is grooved and forms 
a part of lacrimal fossa.
The medial surface of the frontal process is marked 
by a horizontal ridge called ethmoidal crest. It slopes 
downwards and forwards, and articulates with the 
middle nasal concha. An area below the ethmoidal crest 
forms the atrium of the middle meatus.
2. Zygomatic process: It extends laterally to articulate with 
the zygomatic bone.
3. Palatine process: It extends horizontally towards the 
medial side and forms the greater part of the hard palate.
4. Alveolar process: It extends downwards and carries the 
upper teeth. It is arched, being wider behind, to form the 
alveolar arch.
N.B. The two maxillae are united in the anteromedian plane 
at the intermaxillary suture. The portion of the maxillae that 
carry the incisor teeth is sometimes termed premaxilla.
Fractures of maxilla:
(a) Unilateral fracture involves the alveolar process of the 
maxilla.
(b) Bilateral fractures are classified into following three 
types (Fig. 2.18):
Le Fort I: In this a horizontal fracture runs along the 
floor of the nose above and parallel to the palates 
and below the zygomatic bone.
Le Fort II: In this, a pyramidal-shaped fracture line 
passes through the root of the nose, floor of orbits, 
and then runs medial to and below the zygomatic 
bones towards the alveolar margin.
Le Fort III (craniofacial dysfunction): In this, the 
fracture line runs through the root of the nose, 
superior orbital fissures and lateral walls of the orbits 
above the zygomatic bones. There is complete 
separation of cranial skeleton from facial skeleton.
Clinical correlation
TEMPORAL BONE
The temporal bone is an irregular pneumatic bone, situated 
on each side at the base and side of the skull (Fig. 2.19).
--- Page 46 ---
Osteology of the Head and Neck
Fig. 2.18 Bilateral fractures of the maxilla: A, Le Fort I; B, Le 
Fort II; C, Le Fort III.
Fig. 2.19 Right temporal bone: external aspect.
Parietal notch
Suprameatal spine
(spine of Henle)
Squamous part
McEwen’s
triangle
Vertical line
as tangent
to posterior
border of
external
acoustic
meatus
Mastoid process
Supramastoid
crest
Posterosuperior
margin of external
acoustic meatus
Zygomatic process
Mandibular fossa
Squamotympanic fissure
Styloid process
Parts
It consists of the following four morphological parts:
1. Squamous part.
2. Petromastoid part.
3. Tympanic part.
4. Styloid process.
Squamous Part
It is thin, transparent, shell-like plate of bone which projects 
upwards to form the side of the skull. It presents external and 
internal surfaces; and superior and anteroinferior border 
and zygomatic process.
1. External surface forms the floor of temporal fossa and is 
grooved in its centre by the middle temporal artery.
The zygomatic process projects laterally from the 
lower and anterior parts of the temporal surface. It joins 
the temporal process of the zygomatic bone to form the 
zygomatic arch.
A deep cavity behind the articular eminence is called 
mandibular fossa. The mandibular fossa and articular 
tubercle are fundamental portions of the squamous part 
of the temporal bone.
2. Internal surface lies in contact with the temporal lobe of 
the brain. It is grooved by the anterior and posterior 
branches of the middle meningeal artery.
Petromastoid Part
For the sake of convenience of description, the petromastoid 
part is generally divided into two parts: mastoid part and 
petrous part.
1. Petrous part: It is the hardest (rock-like) part of the 
temporal bone and contains inside it: internal ear, 
middle ear, and mastoid antrum, which it safely protects. 
It also contains carotid canal for internal carotid artery.
The petrous part has a shape of a three dimensional 
pyramid. It has a base, an apex, three surfaces, and three 
borders.
The base is fused with the squamous part.
The apex forms the posterolateral wall of the 
foramen lacerum.
Anterior surface forms the posterior part of the 
middle cranial fossa. It presents five features (see 
Chapter 21).
Posterior surface forms the anterior wall of the 
posterior cranial fossa. It presents three features (see 
Chapter 21).
Inferior surface is seen at the base of the skull. It lies 
between the greater wing of sphenoid and basilar 
part of the occipital bone. It presents the lower 
opening of the carotid canal, jugular fossa, tympanic 
canaliculus, and a triangular depression in front of 
the jugular fossa.
The triangular depression in front of the jugular fossa 
lodges inferior ganglion of glossopharyngeal nerve. The 
apex of fossa presents an opening, which leads into a 
bony canal, the cochlear canaliculus which is traversed 
by aqueduct of cochlea/perilymphatic duct.
Superior border: it is a long sharp crest which 
intervenes between middle and posterior cranial 
fossae. It is grooved by superior petrosal sinus. Its 
medial end is crossed by abducent nerve deep to 
petrosphenoid ligament (ligament of Gruber).
Anterior border: its medial part articulates with 
greater wing of sphenoid and forms sulcus tubae on 
the undersurface of the base of the skull. Its lateral 
part joins squamous part at petrosquamosal suture.
Posterior border: its medial part articulates with the 
basilar part of the occipital bone and forms a groove 
which lodges the inferior petrosal sinus. Its lateral
--- Page 47 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
part forms the superolateral boundary of the jugular 
foramen.
2. Mastoid part: It lies below and behind the squamous 
part and contains mastoid antrum, which communicates 
with the middle ear cavity in the petrous part of the 
temporal bone. It ends below as mastoid process. It 
encloses the mastoid air cells. On the medial side of the 
mastoid process there is a notch called digastric notch
for attachment to the posterior belly of digastric muscle.
N.B. Mastoid air cells: The mastoid process consists of a 
cortex of compact bone with a honeycomb of air cells 
underneath it. The air cells are small intercommunicating 
spaces which are continuous with the mastoid antrum and 
middle ear.
Depending upon the air cell development (pneumatiza-
tion), the following three types of mastoid processes have 
been described:
– Pneumatic or cellular mastoid process: In this, air cells are 
well-developed and the intervening septa are thin.
– Diploeic or mixed process: The process consists of 
narrow spaces and few air cells.
– Sclerotic or acellular process: There are no cells or narrow 
spaces in the mastoid process. The antrum is small and 
sigmoid sinus is interposed.
Middle ear infections often spread into mastoid antrum and 
mastoid air cells to cause mastoiditis and mastoid abscess.
Clinical correlation
Tympanic Part
It is a thin, triangular curved plate of bone which forms the 
floor and anterior wall of the external auditory meatus. The 
anterior surface of the tympanic part forms the non-
articular part of the mandibular fossa and is related to the 
part of the parotid gland.
Styloid Process
It is a slender bony projection of about 1 inch length. It 
extends downward and forward from the under surface of 
the tympanic plate. It is crossed externally by the facial nerve.
External acoustic meatus (bony part) opens on the 
surface behind the mandibular fossa below the posterior 
part of the posterior root of zygoma and forms about two-
third of the total length of the external auditory meatus.
The suprameatal triangle (McEwen’s triangle) is a small 
depression posterosuperior to the external acoustic meatus 
(for details see Fig. 2.19 on page 31).
N.B. At birth, the tympanic cavity, tympanic membrane, 
mastoid antrum, ear ossicles, and internal ear—all are of the 
adult size.
PARIETAL BONE
The parietal bone (Fig. 2.20) is a curved plate of bone which 
forms the major portion of the vault of the skull. It is 
quadrilateral in shape.
Parts
The parietal bone presents:
1. Two surfaces: external and internal.
2. Four borders: superior (sagittal), inferior, anterior, and 
posterior.
3. Four angles: frontal, sphenoidal, occipital, and mastoid.
Surfaces
The two surfaces of the parietal bone are as follows:
1. External surface: It is smooth and convex, and presents 
near its centre an elevation called parietal eminence or 
parietal tuberosity or parietal tuber—the most 
prominent feature of this surface. Below the parietal 
tuberosity there are two curved lines called superior and 
inferior temporal lines. The parietal foramen is situated 
close to the posterior part of the superior border.
2. Internal surface: It is concave and overlies the parietal 
lobe of the cerebral hemisphere.
It presents the following features:
(a) Sagittal sulcus (only half) along the superior border, 
which lodges superior sagittal sinus.
(b) Granular pits by the side of sagittal sulcus, which 
lodge the arachnoid granulations.
(c) Deep groove immediately behind the anterior border,
which lodges the anterior branch of the middle 
meningeal artery.
(d) An impression for posterior division of middle menin-
geal artery, which runs upwards from the middle of 
the lower border.
(e) Transverse sulcus across the posteroinferior angle, 
which lodges the sigmoid sinus.
Borders
The four borders of the parietal bone are as follows:
1. Superior (sagittal) border: articulates with similar 
border of opposite parietal bone to form sagittal suture.
2. Inferior (squamosal) border: articulates with three 
bones. From anterior to posterior, these are: (a) greater 
wing of sphenoid bone, (b) squamous part of temporal 
bone, and (c) mastoid portion of the temporal bone.
3. Anterior (frontal) border: articulates with the frontal 
bone to form the coronal suture.
4. Posterior (occipital) border: articulates with the 
squamous part of the occipital bone to form the 
lambdoid suture.
--- Page 48 ---
Osteology of the Head and Neck
Fig. 2.20 Right parietal bone: A, external surface; B, internal surface.
Superior temporal line
Inferior temporal line
Occipital
angle
Mastoid angle
Parietal foramen
For mastoid part of 
temporal bone
For squamous part of 
temporal bone
Sphenoidal
angle
Frontal angle
Parietal tuber
Frontal
(anterosuperior) angle
Anterior border
Groove for anterior
(frontal) branch of
middle meningeal
artery
Sphenoidal
(anteroinferior) angle
Lower border
Half sulcus for
superior sagittal sinus
Pits for arachnoid
granulations (granular pits)
Superior border
Occipital
(posterosuperior) angle
Posterior border
Groove for posterior
(parietal) branch of 
middle meningeal artery
Groove for sigmoid sinus
Mastoid
(posteroinferior) angle
Angles
The four angles of the parietal bone are as follows:
1. Anteroinferior (sphenoidal) angle—lies at pterion.
2. Anterosuperior (frontal) angle—lies at the bregma.
3. Posteroinferior (mastoid) angle—lies at the asterion.
4. Posterosuperior (occipital) angle—lies at lambda.
N.B. The anteroinferior (sphenoidal) angle projects down-
wards and forwards to a considerable extent.
• Occasionally, the parietal bone is divided into two parts: 
upper and lower by an anomalous anteroposterior suture. 
The clinician may confuse this condition with a fracture. 
But it can be ruled out easily as the anomalous parietal 
suture is bilateral.
• The regenerating capacity of parietal bone is very poor 
due to lack of cambium layer in the periosteum.
Clinical correlation
ZYGOMATIC BONE (CHEEK BONE)
The zygomatic bone is also called malar bone because it 
forms the prominence of the cheek which is called mala in 
Latin.
Parts
The zygomatic bone consists of the following three parts:
1. A body.
2. Two processes: frontal and temporal.
Body
It presents three surfaces, viz. orbital surface, lateral surface, 
and temporal surface.
1. Orbital surface forms a part of the lateral wall and floor 
of the orbit. It has a foramen, the zygomatico-orbital 
foramen, which transmits a zygomatic nerve.
2. Lateral surface is subcutaneous and presents a 
zygomaticofacial foramen through which zygomatico-
facial nerve comes out.
--- Page 49 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
3. Temporal surface forms the part of anterior wall of the 
temporal fossa and presents a zygomaticotemporal 
foramen, which transmits the zygomaticotemporal 
nerve.
Processes
These are as follows:
1. Frontal process: It is a thick upward projection. It 
articulates with the zygomatic process of the frontal 
bone.
Its orbital surface presents a small tubercle near the 
orbital margin and 1 cm below the frontozygomatic 
suture called Whitnall’s tubercle.
2. Temporal process: It extends backwards and joins the 
zygomatic process of the temporal bone to form the 
zygomatic arch.
The strong frontal process acts as a line of buttress for 
dispersion of force of impact to the frontal bone during 
mastication by the molar and premolar teeth.
Clinical correlation
N.B. The zygomatic bone ossifies in membrane. Sometimes 
a fissure divides the bone into upper and lower parts. This is 
a usual feature in the Mongolian race—making their malar 
prominences flat, hence it is known as OS Japonicum.
FRONTAL BONE
The frontal (L. frontal = forehead) bone (Fig. 2.21) is located 
in the region of the forehead. It is shaped like a shell.
Parts
It consists of the following six parts:
1. Squamous part (main part).
2. Nasal part.
3. Two orbital plates.
4. Two zygomatic processes.
Squamous Part
On each side the lower part of the squamous part joins the 
orbital plate. The junction of these two forms the supraorbital 
margin. The squamous part presents external and inner 
surfaces.
The external surface above each supraorbital margin 
presents a curved elevation called superciliary arch. A 
rounded prominence between the medial ends of two 
superciliary arches is called glabella. Above the superciliary 
arch the external surface displays an elevation called frontal 
tuber or eminence or tuberosity.
The internal surface is deeply concave and presents a 
median bony ridge called frontal crest, which is continuous 
above with the sagittal sulcus.
Nasal Part
It is the portion of bone which projects downwards between 
the right and left supraorbital margins. It presents a nasal
notch, which articulates inferiorly with the two nasal bones 
one on each side of median plane and laterally on each side 
with frontal process of maxilla and the lacrimal bone.
Orbital Plates
Each orbital is a triangular curved plate of bone extending 
horizontally backwards from the supraorbital margin. It 
forms most of the roof of the orbit. The two orbital plates are 
separated from each other by U-shaped ethmoidal notch for 
accommodating cribriform plate of the ethmoid bone.
Zygomatic Processes
One on each side, it extends downwards and laterally from 
the lateral end of the supraorbital margin. The zygomatic 
process joins the frontal process of the zygomatic bone. From 
the posterior margin of each zygomatic process the temporal 
line curves upwards and backwards and splits into superior 
and inferior temporal lines.
Frontal crest
Sulcus for superior sagittal sinus
Ethmoidal notch
Orbital plate
Zygomatic
process
Supraorbital notch
Nasal spine
Ethmoidal air cells
Temporal line
Zygomatic
process
Remains of
metopic suture
Frontal tuber
Superciliary arch
Supraorbital notch
Nasal spine
Nasal notch
Fig. 2.21 Frontal bone: A, external aspect; B, inferior aspect.
--- Page 50 ---
Osteology of the Head and Neck
• The frontal bone ossifies in membrane. The primary 
centres appear one for each half of the frontal bone in the 
region of frontal tuberosity. At birth, frontal bone is made 
up of two halves, separated by a median frontal suture. 
The union between the two halves begins at second year 
and usually completes by the end of the eighth year. The 
remains of this suture in the adult are often seen in the 
region of glabella. It is termed metopic suture.
• The fracture of orbital plate of frontal bone leads to 
hemorrhage into the orbit. The hemorrhage acquires a 
triangular shape underneath the conjunctiva with apex 
towards the cornea and base towards the orbital margin.
• The frontal squama is prone to fracture. In neonates and 
infants, it is a depressed fracture (a dimple in the bone), 
whereas in adults it is a fissured fracture, i.e., the 
depressed area always shows an irregular line of fracture 
at its periphery.
Clinical correlation
OCCIPITAL BONE
The occipital bone (Fig. 2.22) occupies the posterior part of 
the skull. It is characterized by the presence of the large 
foramen magnum.
Parts
It consists of the following four parts:
1. Squamous part.
2. Two condylar parts.
3. Basilar part.
Squamous Part
It is an expanded plate above and behind the foramen 
magnum. It presents two surfaces and three angles.
1. External surface: It is convex and shows the following 
features:
Fig. 2.22 Occipital bone: A, external surface; B, internal surface.
Internal occipital
protuberance
Sulcus for occipital
sinus
Vermian fossa
Condylar canal
Jugular process
Jugular tubercle
Sulcus for inferior
petrosal sinus
Sulcus for
sigmoid sinus
Groove for
transverse sinus
Internal
occipital crest
Sulcus for superior
sagittal sinus
External occipital
protuberance
Highest nuchal line
Superior nuchal line
Inferior nuchal line
Condylar canal
Jugular process
Condyle
Hypoglossal canal
Pharyngeal tubercle
Foramen magnum
External
occipital crest
--- Page 51 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
(a) External occipital protuberance, a median elevation 
at the point of its maximum convexity. The most 
prominent point of this protuberance is called inion.
(b) External occipital crest, a bony crest running down-
wards from external occipital protuberance to the 
foramen magnum.
(c) Two superior nuchal lines, one on each side, curve 
laterally from external occipital protuberance.
(d) Two inferior nuchal lines, one on each side curve 
laterally from the middle of the external occipital 
crest.
2. Internal surface: It is concave and shows the following 
features:
(a) Internal occipital protuberance, a bony elevation 
close to the centre.
(b) Internal occipital crest, a vertical bony crest which 
runs downwards from the internal occipital 
protuberance towards the foramen magnum. Near 
the foramen magnum it splits to form a triangular 
depression called vermian fossa.
(c) Cruciate arrangement of four grooves, radiating from 
the internal occipital protuberance:
 Sagittal sulcus/groove, runs upwards towards the 
superior angle it is occupied by superior sagittal 
sinus.
 Transverse sulcus/groove, one on each radiate 
towards the lateral angle; it is occupied by the 
transverse sinus.
 A groove descends downwards towards the 
foramen magnum. It is occupied by the occipital 
sinus.
The small parts of grooves for sigmoid and inferior 
petrosal sinuses are also seen on the internal surface.
The squamous part of temporal bone below the highest 
nuchal line is ossified in cartilage from two centres—one on 
each side in the 7th prenatal week and soon joins with each 
other. The squamous part above the highest nuchal line is 
ossified in membrane from two centres—one on each side 
in the 8th prenatal week and soon fuses with each other.
The two portions, upper and lower, of squamous part 
usually unite with each other in the 3rd month after birth 
when the baby starts holding his neck.
Sometimes the part above the highest nuchal line 
remains separate and persists as interparietal bone.
Clinical correlation
Condylar Parts
It is situated one on each side of the foramen magnum. The 
medial part bears occipital condyles. The lateral part, a 
quadrilateral plate projecting laterally from the posterior 
half of the occipital condyle is called jugular process.
The outer opening of hypoglossal canal transmitting 
hypoglossal nerve lies lateral to the anterior part of the 
occipital condyle.
The depression just behind the occipital condyle is called 
condylar fossa. Sometimes it presents a foramen in its floor 
called posterior condylar canal.
The anterior margin of jugular process presents a concave 
jugular notch which with similar notch on the petrous 
temporal bone forms the jugular foramen.
The superior surface of the condylar part presents the 
jugular tubercle.
Basilar Part (Basiocciput)
It is a wide bar of bone which lies in front of the foramen 
magnum and articulates in front with the body of sphenoid 
to form the basisphenoid joint (a primary cartilaginous 
joint).
The upper surface of the basisphenoid presents a shallow 
gutter, which slopes downwards and backwards from 
dorsum sellae to the foramen magnum. It is called clivus.
The inferior surface of the basilar part presents a pharyngeal 
tubercle in median plane, about 1 cm in front of the foramen 
magnum.
Medigolegal importance of basisphenoid joint: The 
basisphenoid joint is of medicolegal importance in 
assessing the age of the individual. It is the primary 
cartilaginous joint with plate of hyaline cartilage between 
the basilar part of the occipital bone and posterior part of 
the body of sphenoid bone. This cartilaginous plate is 
completely replaced by the bone (synostosis) by the 25th 
year of the age.
Clinical correlation
The basisphenoid joint is responsible for growth of the 
skull in length.
SPHENOID BONE
The sphenoid (Fig. 2.23) is an unpaired bone situated at the 
base of the skull. It resembles the shape of a butterfly or bat 
with outstretched wings.
Parts
It consists of the following seven parts:
 A body.
 Two lesser wings.
 Two greater wings.
 Two pterygoid processes.
N.B. Two pterygoid processes represent the legs of the bat.
--- Page 52 ---
Osteology of the Head and Neck
Fig. 2.23 Sphenoid bone: A, superior aspect; B, posterior aspect.
Lesser wing of
sphenoid
Optic canal
Anterior clinoid
process
Greater wing of
sphenoid
Middle clinoid
process
Tuberculum sellae
Basisphenoid
Dorsum sellae
Hypophyseal fossa
Lingula
Posterior clinoid process
Carotid sulcus
Foramen spinosum
Foramen ovale
Foramen rotundum
Superior orbital
fissure
Sulcus chiasmaticus
Ethmoidal spine
Jugum sphenoidale
Lesser wing
Greater wing
Scaphoid fossa
Lateral pterygoid plate
Medial pterygoid plate
Pterygoid hamulus
Rostrum
Pterygoid canal
Vaginal process
Lingula
Foramen ovale
Foramen
rotundum
Superior
orbital fissure
Anterior
clinoid process
Posterior clinoid process
Body
It is cuboidal in shape and contains a pair of sphenoidal air 
sinuses. The body presents six surfaces: superior, inferior, 
anterior, posterior and right and left lateral surfaces.
1. The superior surface presents the following features 
from before backwards:
(a) Ethmoidal spine, a triangular projection between the 
two lesser wings. It articulates with the posterior 
margin of the cribriform plate.
(b) Jugum sphenoidale, a flattened plate of bone behind 
the ethmoidal spine.
(c) Sulcus chiasmaticus, a shallow transverse groove, 
which leads on each side into optic canal.
(d) Tuberculum sellae, a horizontal elevation forming 
posterior limit of sulcus chiasmaticus. On each side 
it presents small conical projections, the middle
clinoid process.
(e) Hypophyseal fossa, a deep depression which lodges 
pituitary gland.
(f) Dorsum sellae, a square plate of bone which projects 
upwards and presents a conical projection on each 
side called posterior clinoid process.
N.B. Sella turcica is collective name given to tuberculum 
sellae, hypophyseal fossa, and dorsum sellae. It resembles a 
Turkish saddle.
2. Inferior surface presents the following three features:
(a) Sphenoidal rostrum, a median ridge projecting 
downward. It occupies the groove between the alae 
of Vomer.
(b) Sphenoidal concha, a triangular plate of bone on 
each side of rostrum which articulates with the alae 
of Vomer.
(c) Vaginal process, a triangular bony shelf projecting 
downwards and medially from the base of each 
medial pterygoid plate. It helps form vomerovaginal 
and palatovaginal canals.
3. Anterior surface presents the following features:
(a) Sphenoidal crest, a vertical median ridge which 
articulates with the posterior border of the 
perpendicular plate of ethmoid to form part of nasal 
septum. On each side of the sphenoid crest lies the 
opening of sphenoidal air sinuses.
(b) Upper vertical parts of sphenoidal conchae, it lie on 
each side of the crest.
--- Page 53 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
4. Posterior surface is quadrilateral in shape and articulates 
by a plate of hyaline cartilage with the basiocciput.
5. Each lateral surface of the body joins with the greater 
wing of sphenoid (projecting laterally) and the pterygoid 
process (extending downwards). The lateral surface 
presents a groove called carotid sulcus produced by the 
internal carotid artery.
Lesser Wings
Each lesser wing arises from the anterior part of the body of 
sphenoid by two roots. Between these two roots lies the optic 
canal. The projecting medial ends of the lesser wings are 
called anterior clinoid processes.
Greater Wings
Each greater wing spans out laterally from the side of the 
body forming the floor of the middle cranial fossa.
The greater wing has the following three surfaces:
1. Upper surface: It lies in the middle cranial fossa (for 
details see middle cranial fossa on page 318).
2. Lateral (infratemporal) surface: It is divided into 
temporal 
infratemporal 
surfaces 
infratemporal crest.
3. Anterior (orbital) surface: It lies at the lateral wall of the 
orbit and separates the superior orbital fissure from the 
inferior orbital fissure.
Pterygoid Processes
They have been described on page 19.
• The craniopharyngeal canal is occasionally present in 
the floor of the pituitary fossa. It represents the remnant of 
Rathke’s pouch which forms the anterior lobe of the 
pituitary gland.
• The observation of sella turcica in radiographs of skull is 
of great clinical significance because pathological 
changes in it reflect intracranial space-occupying lesions 
such as pituitary tumor.
Clinical correlation
ETHMOID BONE
The ethmoid is an unpaired fragile bone (Fig. 2.24) located 
between two orbital cavities. The ethmoid is so named 
because it possesses a perforated (sieve-like) plate called 
cribriform plate (Gr. ethmoid = sieve-like).
Parts
The ethmoid bone consists of the following parts:
 Cribriform plate.
 Crista galli.
 Perpendicular plate.
 Two labyrinths.
Cribriform Plate
The cribriform plate fills the ethmoidal notch between the 
two orbital plates of the frontal bone and separates the nasal 
cavities from the anterior cranial fossa. It has a number of 
small pores in it which transmit the filaments of olfactory 
nerve from the olfactory epithelium of the nasal cavity to the 
olfactory bulb of the brain.
Crista Galli
It is a triangular median crest on the upper surface of the 
cribriform plate. It resembles the crest on the head of Gallus 
domesticus (cock’s comb), the red growth of flesh on the top 
of the head of a cock, and gives attachment to the anterior 
end of the falx cerebri.
Perpendicular Plate
It is a quadrilateral plate which projects downwards from the 
inferior surface of cribriform plate. It forms the upper part 
of the nasal septum.
Labyrinths
The labyrinths are the cuboidal bony boxes filled with air 
cells. The air cells, according to their location, are divided 
into three groups: anterior, middle, and posterior. The lateral 
surfaces of the labyrinth forms the medial wall of the orbit 
Fig. 2.24 Ethmoid bone: A, location of ethmoid in relation 
to nasal cavity, orbits, and maxillary sinuses; B, superior view 
of ethmoid bone.
Orbital plate of
frontal bone
Orbit
Cribriform plate
Crista galli
Vomer
Inferior concha
Middle concha
Perpendicular
plate of ethmoid
Superior concha
Ethmoidal
air cells
Maxillary
air sinus
Zygomatic bone
Nasal slit
Anterior
ethmoidal
foramen
Frontal crest
Labyrinth of
ethmoidal
air cells
Posterior
ethmoidal
foramen
--- Page 54 ---
Osteology of the Head and Neck
and medial surface forms the lateral wall of the nasal cavity. 
The two shelf-like projections from the medial surface are 
called superior and middle conchae (remember: inferior 
concha is an independent bone).
In case of head injury, the blood-stained discharge of CSF 
from nose (CSF rhinorrhea) indicates fracture of cribriform 
plate of the ethmoid in the anterior cranial fossa. It may 
result into anosmia (loss of smell) due to damage of olfactory 
nerves.
Clinical correlation
INFERIOR NASAL CONCHA (TURBINATE BONE)
There are two inferior nasal conchae. Each inferior nasal 
concha projects downwards from the lateral wall of the nasal 
cavity. It is a curved bony plate and presents the following 
features:
 Medial and lateral surfaces.
 Superior and inferior borders.
 Anterior and posterior ends.
Medial and Lateral Surfaces
The medial surface is convex. The lateral surface is deeply 
concave and forms the medial wall of the inferior meatus of 
the nose.
Superior and Inferior Borders
The superior border is thin and irregular. Its anterior part 
articulates with conchal crest of maxilla and posterior part 
with conchal crest of the palatine bone. The middle presents 
three processes from before backwards: lacrimal, maxillary, 
and ethmoidal. The inferior border is thick and gently 
curved.
Anterior and Posterior Ends
Both anterior and posterior ends are pointed; the latter is 
more marrow.
The lacrimal process of inferior nasal concha articulates 
with the margins of nasolacrimal groove of maxilla to form 
nasolacrimal canal. The surgical fracture of inferior nasal 
concha is sometimes needed to manage congenital lacrimal 
defects.
Clinical correlation
PALATINE BONE
There are two palatine bones (Fig. 2.25). Each palatine bone 
is lodged between the maxilla in front and the pterygoid 
process of sphenoid bone behind. The palatine bone is so 
named because the two palatine bones form the posterior 
one-third of the hard palate.
Parts
The palatine bone is L-shaped and consists of the following 
two plates:
1. Horizontal plate.
2. Perpendicular plate.
It also possesses the following three processes:
1. Orbital process.
2. Sphenoidal process.
3. Pyramidal process.
Horizontal Plate
It projects medially and unites with its counterpart of 
opposite side to form the posterior one-fourth of the hard 
palate.
Perpendicular Plate
It is a vertical plate which is fixed with the posterior part of 
the medial surface of the maxilla. At its upper border the 
Fig. 2.25 Palatine bone: A, medial aspect; B, posterior 
aspect of two palatine bones together.
Orbital process
Sphenopalatine notch
Sphenoidal
process
Ethmoidal
crest
Conchal crest
Nasal crest
Pyramidal process
Posterior
nasal spine
For medial
pterygoid plate
Pterygoid fossa
For lateral
pterygoid plate
Inferior meatus
Middle meatus
Superior meatus
Orbital surface
Maxillary
process
Greater palatine foramen
Lesser palatine foramen
Pyramidal process
Horizontal plate
Inferior meatus
Conchal crest
Middle meatus
Ethmoidal crest
Superior meatus
Sphenoidal
process
Sphenopalatine notch
Orbital process
Horizontal plate
--- Page 55 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
perpendicular plate presents two processes: (a) sphenoidal 
process and (b) orbital process. Between the two processes it 
encloses the sphenopalatine notch, which is converted into 
sphenopalatine foramen by inferior surface of the body of 
sphenoid. The lateral surface of the perpendicular plate 
presents a vertical groove, the greater palatine groove.
Orbital Process
It projects upwards and laterally from the anterior part of the 
upper border of the perpendicular plate, in front of 
sphenopalatine notch. It presents three articular and two 
non-articular surfaces.
Sphenoid Process
It projects upwards and medially from the posterior part of 
the upper border of the perpendicular plate. It presents three 
surfaces and three borders.
Pyramidal Process
It projects posterolaterally from the junction between the 
perpendicular and horizontal plates. The pyramidal process 
is pierced by the lesser palatine canals. The greater palatine 
canals run between the maxilla and the perpendicular plate 
of the palatine.
The Le Fort fractures of mid-facial skeleton always involve 
the perpendicular plates of palatine bones. The Le Fort I 
involves the lower one-third of the perpendicular plates, 
whereas Le Fort II and Le Fort III involve the upper parts of 
the perpendicular plates of palatine.
Clinical correlation
VOMER
The vomer (Fig. 2.26) is a thin quadrilateral plate of bone, 
which forms the posteroinferior part of the nasal septum.
Parts
The vomer presents the following features:
 Four borders.
 Two lateral surfaces.
Borders
The four borders are as follows:
1. Superior border is thick and grooved between the two 
diverging alae. The groove fits over the sphenoidal 
rostrum.
The margin of ala intervenes between the body of 
sphenoid and vaginal process of medial pterygoid plate. 
The vomerovaginal canal is formed between the ala of 
vomer and vaginal process of medial pterygoid plate 
(Fig. 2.26).
2. Lower border articulates with the nasal crest formed by 
the maxillae and palatine bones of the two sides.
3. Posterior border is free and separates the two posterior 
nasal apertures.
4. Anterior border is longest and slopes downwards and 
forwards. In its upper part it articulates with the 
perpendicular plate of ethmoid and in its lower part 
with the septal cartilage.
Lateral Surfaces
The lateral surface on each side is covered by a mucous 
membrane and is marked by an anteroinferior groove for 
nasopalatine nerve and vessels.
• The vomer is involved in all three types of Le Fort fractures 
of midfacial skeleton.
• The vomer is paper thin. A transverse fracture of vomer 
due to direct blow on the nose leads to deviated nasal 
septum (DNS).
Clinical correlation
HYOID BONE
It is not actually a part of the skull. This U-shaped bone is 
located in the front of the neck between the mandible and 
the larynx at the level of the 3rd cervical vertebra. It is unique 
in the sense that, it does not articulate with any other bone in 
the body, but it is suspended from styloid processes of 
temporal bones by stylohyoid ligaments (Fig. 2.27).
Medial
Palatovaginal canal
Vomerovaginal canal
Sphenoidal process of
palatine bone
Ala of vomer
Rostrum of sphenoid
Vaginal process of
sphenoid
Lateral
Body of sphenoid
Greater wing
of sphenoid
Perpendicular
plate of palatine
Vomer
Pterygoid
plates
Fig. 2.26 Vomer in relation to sphenoid and palatine 
bones. Note the formation of vomerovaginal and 
palatovaginal canals.
--- Page 56 ---
Osteology of the Head and Neck
Fig. 2.27 Hyoid bone (anterior view): A, parts of hyoid 
bone; B, muscle attachments.
Body
Lesser
cornu
Greater cornu
Genioglossus
Geniohyoid
Tubercle
Middle
constrictor
Hyoglossus
Thyrohyoid
Mylohyoid
Omohyoid
(sup. belly)
Stylohyoid
(2 slips)
Sternohyoid
Parts (Fig. 2.27A)
The hyoid bone consists of the following five parts:
 A body.
 A pair of greater cornu (or horns).
 A pair of lesser cornu (or horns).
Body
It is elongated and quadrilateral in form. The body presents 
two surfaces (anterior and posterior) and two lateral 
extremities:
1. The anterior surface is convex and faces forwards and 
upwards. Its upper part is crossed by a transverse line or 
ridge and in many cases a vertical median ridge divides 
the body into two lateral halves.
2. The posterior surface is smooth and concave. It faces 
backwards and downwards. The posterior surface of 
hyoid bone is separated from the epiglottis by the 
thyrohyoid membrane; a bursa intervenes between the 
bone and the membrane.
3. The lateral extremities of the body on each side are 
continuous with the greater cornu. In early life, the 
lateral extremities are connected with the greater cornu 
by a cartilage, but after middle life, they become united 
by a bone.
Greater Cornu
Each greater cornu projects backwards and upwards from 
the side of the body of the bone. They diminish in size from 
before backwards. Each cornu ends posteriorly in a tubercle.
When the neck is relaxed, the two greater cornua can be 
gripped in vivo between the index finger and the thumb, and 
then the hyoid bone can be moved from side to side.
Lesser Cornu
Each lesser cornu is a small conical bony projection that is 
attached at the junction of the body and greater cornu. The 
stylohyoid ligament is attached to the tip of the lesser cornu 
and is sometimes ossified.
N.B. The hyoid bone provides attachment to a number of 
muscles, otherwise it is of little functional significance 
(Fig. 2.27B).
• In suspected cases of death, the examination of hyoid 
bone is of great medicolegal significance, because 
fracture of hyoid bone in such cases suggests death by 
throttling or strangulation.
• The tip of greater cornu can be palpated in the relaxed 
neck near the anterior border of sternocleidomastoid 
muscle, midway between the laryngeal prominence and 
mastoid process. The lingual artery forms a loop above 
the greater cornua, hence the latter forms an important 
surgical landmark for locating the lingual artery for ligation 
in radical surgery of the neck.
Clinical correlation
CERVICAL VERTEBRAE
There are seven cervical vertebrae, numbered 1 to 7 from 
above downwards. They are small in size as compared to 
thoracic and lumbar vertebrae as they have to carry less 
weight. They are identified by the presence of foramen in 
their transverse processes called foramen transversarium—
the cardinal feature of cervical vertebrae. The 3rd to 6th are 
typical because they have common features. The 1st, 2nd, 
and 7th are atypical because they possess special features for 
individual identification.
FEATURES OF TYPICAL CERVICAL VERTEBRAE 
(Fig. 2.28)
The features of typical cervical vertebrae are as follows:
 The body:
(a) It is small.
(b) It is broader from side to side than from before back-
wards.
--- Page 57 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
Fig. 2.29 Atypical cervical vertebrae: A, atlas vertebra 
(superior aspect); B, axis vertebra (posterosuperior aspect); 
C, seventh cervical vertebra (superior aspect).
(c) Its superior surface is concave transversely with 
upward projecting lips on each side.
(d) The inferior surface on the anterior margin of the 
body projects downwards in front of the intervertebral 
disc while the lateral margins are beveled laterally to 
form the synovial joints with projecting lips of the 
vertebra below. These are called uncovertebral joints 
(joints of Luschka).
 The vertebral foramen is triangular and larger than the 
body.
 The superior and inferior articular facets are flat:
(a) Superior facets are directed backwards and upwards.
(b) Inferior facets are directed forwards and downwards.
 The transverse processes are small and pierced by 
foramen transversarium. Each process has anterior and 
posterior roots, which end in tubercles called anterior and 
posterior tubercles. They are joined together by 
costotransverse bar. The costal element consists of 
anterior root, anterior tubercle costotransverse bar, and 
posterior tubercle. The posterior root represents the 
transverse element of the developing vertebra.
 The spine is short and bifid.
FEATURES OF ATYPICAL CERVICAL VERTEBRAE 
(Fig. 2.29)
First Cervical Vertebra (Fig. 2.29A)
The 1st cervical vertebra is called atlas because it supports 
the globe of the head on its shoulders. According to Greek 
mythology, the Atlas is the God who supported the globe of 
earth on his shoulders.
It has following features:
1. It is ring shaped and has no body and no spine.
2. It consists of:
(a) right and left lateral masses connected by a short 
anterior arch and a long curved posterior arch, and
(b) right and left transverse processes.
The anterior arch is marked in the median plane by the 
anterior tubercle on its anterior aspect, and an oval facet on 
its posterior aspect for articulation with the dens of the 2nd 
cervical vertebra to form atlantoaxial joint.
The posterior arch forms two-fifth of the ring and its 
posterior aspect is marked by a median posterior tubercle. 
The upper surface of the posterior arch behind the lateral 
mass is marked by a groove which lodges the vertebral artery 
and the 1st cervical nerve.
Groove for vertebral
artery and first
cervical nerve
Anterior arch
Anterior tubercle
Facet for dens
Superior articular
facet
Foramen
transversarium
Transverse
process
Posterior arch
Posterior tubercle
Tubercle of spine
Spine
Transverse process
Posterior
tubercle
(prominent)
Foramen
transversarium
Superior
articular facet
Spine (massive)
Lamina
(thick and strong)
Transverse
process
with posterior
tubercle only
Superior articular
facet
Impression for
alar ligament 
Impression for
apical ligament
Fig. 2.28 Typical cervical vertebra (superior aspect); inset 
on the right side shows the costal and transverse elements 
of the transverse process.
Anterior tubercle
Foramen transversarium
Posterior tubercle
Superior articular facet
Lamina
Bifid spine
Vertebral
foramen
Posterior
root
Costotransverse bar
Anterior root
Body
Transverse element
Posterior root
Posterior
tubercle
Costotransverse
Anterior tubercle
Foramen
transversarium
Costal element
Anterior root
--- Page 58 ---
Osteology of the Head and Neck
The lateral mass presents the following features:
 (i) Its upper and lower surfaces bear superior and inferior 
articular facets, respectively.
– The superior articular facet is concave and 
elongated. It is directed upwards and medially to 
articulate with the corresponding condyle of the 
occipital bone to form the atlanto-occipital joint.
– The inferior articular facet is flat and circular. It is 
directed downwards, medially and backwards to 
articulate with the corresponding facet on the axis 
vertebra to form the atlantoaxial joint.
 (ii) The medial surface of the lateral mass is marked by a 
small roughened tubercle to provide attachment to the 
transverse ligament of the atlas.
 (iii) The transverse processes project laterally from the 
lateral masses. They are strong and larger than that of 
other cervical vertebrae. The elongated transverse 
processes act as efficient levers for the rotation of the 
atlas vertebra.
N.B. The most important feature of atlas vertebra is the 
absence of its body. The body is absent because during 
development the centrum of 1st cervical vertebra gets fused 
with the centrum of axis to form the dens. Thus dens of axis 
vertebra represents the body of the atlas vertebra.
Second Cervical Vertebra (Fig. 2.29B)
The 2nd cervical vertebra is called axis because the atlas 
rotates like a wheel around the pivot provided by the 
odontoid process (or dens) of 2nd cervical vertebra. It has 
the following features:
It possesses a strong tooth-like process projecting upwards 
from the body called odontoid process. The odontoid 
process represents the centrum (body) of the atlas, which 
has fused with the centrum of the axis vertebra.
The dens articulates anteriorly with the anterior arch 
of the atlas and posteriorly with the transverse ligament 
of the atlas. It provides attachment to the apical ligament
at its apex and on each side below the apex to the alar
ligaments.
2. The prominent anterior margin of the inferior surface 
of the body projects downwards to a considerable extent.
3. The spine is massive, i.e., it is large, thick and very strong 
and deeply grooved inferiorly. Its tip is bifid.
4. The transverse processes are very small and lack the 
anterior tubercles. The foramen transversarium is 
directed upwards and laterally.
5. The laminae are thick and strong.
6. The superior articular facets on the upper surface of the 
body extend onto the pedicles. The massive pedicle 
overhangs the foramen transversarium laterally.
The superior articular facet is large, flat, and circular. They 
are weight bearing and encroach on the side of the body. It is 
directed upwards and laterally to articulate with the corre-
sponding facet of the atlas.
The inferior articular facet lies posterior to the transverse 
process and is directed downwards and forwards to articulate 
with the 3rd cervical vertebra.
N.B. The old name of the axis was the OS Cheloni because 
of its resemblance to the head of a tortoise.
Table 2.4 Atypical features of 1st, 2nd, and 7th cervical vertebrae
First cervical (atlas)
Absence of body
Absence of spine
Long transverse processes
Superior articular facets are concave and elongated. They are kidney-shaped. The 
inferior articular facets are more or less circular
Second cervical (axis)
Presence of odontoid process
Transverse processes are small and lack the anterior tubercle
Anterior margin of the inferior surface of the body projects downwards to a 
considerable extent
Foramen transversarium is directed superolaterally (cf. in typical vertebrae it is directed 
vertically)
Inferior surface presents a deep and wide inferior vertebral notch placed in front of the 
inferior articular process. The superior vertebral notch is shallow and is present behind 
the superior articular process
Seventh cervical (vertebra prominens)
Spine is strong, long and not bifid
Transverse process is relatively long and lacks the anterior tubercle
Foramen transversarium is relatively small
--- Page 59 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
Seventh Cervical Vertebra (Fig. 2.29C)
The 7th cervical vertebra is called vertebra prominens
because its spine is very long and forms a prominent palpable 
projection in the lower part of the nuchal furrow.
The features of the 7th vertebra are as follows:
1. Its spine is thick, long, and nearly horizontal. It is not 
bifid and ends in a tubercle.
2. The transverse processes are comparatively long and 
large and lack the anterior tubercles.
3. The foramen transversarium is relatively small and does 
not transmit the vertebral artery. It transmits only 
accessory vertebral vein.
The atypical features of 1st, 2nd, and 7th cervical vertebrae 
are summarized in Table 2.4.
• Carotid tubercle: The anterior tubercle of the transverse 
process of 6th cervical vertebra is large and called carotid 
tubercle of Chassaignac because the common carotid 
artery can be compressed against it, medial to the anterior 
border of sternocleidomastoid muscle.
• Hangman’s fracture (see page 109, Chapter 7).
• Luschka’s joints are commonest sites of osteophyte 
formation (see page 105, Chapter 7).
• Klippel–Feil syndrome is a clinical condition in which 
cervical vertebrae are fused and deformed congenitally.
• The congenital fusion of ring of atlas vertebra to the base 
of the occiput is called occipitalization of atlas. It is one 
of the most common abnormalities of the upper cervical 
vertebrae.
Clinical correlation
--- Page 60 ---
Osteology of the Head and Neck
Golden Facts to Remember
  OS-Japonicum
Zygomatic bone divided into upper and lower parts
  Most commonly fractured cranial fossa
Middle cranial fossa
  Largest fontanelle
Anterior fontanelle
  Metopic Suture
Median suture above nasion between two halves of 
frontal bone in adult skull
  McEwen’s triangle (suprameatal triangle)
A small triangular depression posterosuperior to the 
external auditory meatus (refer to page 31)
  Largest foramen of skull
Foramen magnum
  Most fragile and irregular bone of skull
Ethmoid 
  Commonest site of fracture mandible
Canine region
  Cavities and bones within skull which are of full 
adult size at birth
Tympanic cavity, mastoid antrum, and ear ossicles
  Most important part of temporal bone
Petrous part
  Largest primary cartilaginous joint of skull 
Basisphenoid joint
Mr Ramu, a young taxi driver, suffered a head injury 
following a collision of his taxi with a truck. He became 
unconscious. He was taken to the emergency room by 
the traffic police. Radiographs of the skull were taken. 
The lateral view of skull radiograph revealed a fracture 
in the region of temporal fossa and an underlying 
epidural/extradural hematoma. He was referred to the 
Department of Neurosurgery where he was operated. 
The surgical procedure involved the removal of 
hematoma and ligation of ruptured artery the next day. 
Mr Ramu regained consciousness and he was discharged 
from the hospital.
Questions
1. What is most important surface landmark in the 
region of temporal fossa?
2. Can this surface landmark be visualized or 
palpated. If not, then tell the method to locate it.
3. Name the vessels which ruptured to cause 
extradural hematoma and were ligated by the 
neurosurgeon.
Answers
1. Pterion (for details refer to page 18 of this chapter).
2. No. It lies 4 cm above the midpoint of the 
zygomatic arch and can be located by Stiles method 
(see page 11, Chapter 1).
3. Middle meningeal vessels.
Clinical Case Study
--- Page 61 ---
Scalp, Temple, and Face
CHAPTER
The scalp, temple, and face are important areas of the head, 
and therefore, need to be studied thoroughly. The injuries 
are frequently inflicted in these areas. The nature of injuries 
varies from superficial wounds to deep cuts. The scalp and 
temple are covered by thick hair; hence lesions at these sites 
go unnoticed for quite sometime by the people. Infection 
from these regions can travel inside cranial cavity through 
venous channels leading to fatal consequences. The face is 
the commonest site for plastic surgery done to enhance the 
beauty or to repair congenital defects and defects produced 
by the injuries. The simple inspection of face provides a 
substantial clue to a number of underlying bodily diseases. 
Also, the face being the exposed part of the body is prone to 
sun allergy and skin cancer.
SCALP
The term scalp is applied to the soft tissues covering the vault 
of skull.
Extent
It extends anteriorly up to the eyebrows (superciliary arches), 
posteriorly up to the superior nuchal lines, and laterally on 
each side up to superior temporal line (Fig. 3.1).
N.B. According to some authorities, scalp extends laterally 
on each side, up to the zygomatic arch.
LAYERS
The scalp consists of five layers. From superficial to deep 
these are as follows (Fig. 3.2):
1. Skin.
2. Connective tissue (superficial fascia).
3. Aponeurosis 
(occipitofrontalis 
muscle 
aponeurosis).
4. Loose areolar tissue.
5. Pericranium.
The sequence of the layers of scalp can be easily remem-
bered by a perfect mnemonic SCALP derived by using initial 
letter of each layer.
Skin: The skin of scalp is thick and hairy except over the 
forehead. It is firmly adherent to epicranial aponeurosis by 
dense connective tissue of superficial fascia, as in palms and 
soles. Being hairy it contains maximum number of hair 
follicles and associated sebaceous glands. As a result, scalp is 
the commonest site of sebaceous cysts. It also contains 
numerous sweat glands.
N.B. It has been estimated that there are about 1,20,000 
hair on the scalp of an adult individual. About 20–100 hair 
are lost daily and replaced concomitantly. The baldness (loss 
of hair) mainly affects males and few elderly females with 
high level of androgenic hormones in their blood.
Fig. 3.1 Extent of the scalp.
Superior
nuchal line
Superior
temporal line
Scalp
Superciliary
arch
--- Page 62 ---
Scalp, Temple, and Face
Connective tissue (superficial fascia): The superficial fascia 
of the scalp is made up of dense fibrous connective tissue 
that firmly binds the skin to the underlying occipitofrontalis 
and its aponeurosis. Fibrous septa divide this layer into 
numerous small pockets containing lobules of fat. The blood 
vessels and nerves of the scalp lie in this layer. They enter it 
from below at the periphery.
The walls of the vessels are adherent to the fibrous net-
work; hence when blood vessels are torn or cut during an 
injury, they are unable to retract and cause profuse bleeding.
The bleeding, however, can be stopped by pressing against 
the underlying bone.
Aponeurosis: This layer is formed by occipitofrontalis 
muscle and its aponeurosis. The occipitofrontalis muscle 
consists of four small bellies: two frontal bellies and two 
occipital bellies. Since greater part of this layer is formed by 
aponeurosis, it is called aponeurotic layer. The aponeurosis of 
occipitofrontalis muscle is also called epicranial aponeurosis
or galea aponeurotica (Latin: galea = helmet).
The wounds of the scalp do not gape unless epicranial 
aponeurosis is cut transversely because the aponeurosis is 
under tension in the anteroposterior direction by the tone of 
occipitofrontalis muscle.
Loose areolar tissue: As the name indicates, this layer is 
made of loose areolar tissue. It serves as a natural plane of 
cleavage during craniotomy. This layer is traversed by 
emissary veins connecting veins in the second layer of scalp 
with intracranial dural venous sinuses.
Pericranium: The fifth layer of scalp is formed by the 
periosteum of bones of vault of skull called pericranium. It 
is loosely attached to the bones and can be easily stripped, 
but at sutures it is firmly attached to sutural membrane, 
which in turn attaches it to the endocranium (the periosteum 
covering inner aspect of the skull bones).
Further Details
Occipitofrontalis muscle (Fig. 3.3)
Origin and insertion:
1. The frontal bellies arise from skin and subcutaneous 
tissue over the eyebrows and root of the nose, run 
backwards to be inserted into epicranial aponeurosis in 
front of coronal suture. They have no bony attachment 
of their own. The deeper fibres of frontal belly merge 
with procerus, corrugator supercilii, and orbicularis 
oculi muscles. The front bellies are longer, wider, and 
partly united with each other along their medial borders.
2. The occipital bellies arise from lateral two-third of the 
superior nuchal lines and extend forwards to be inserted 
into the epicranial aponeurosis. The two occipital bellies 
are small and separated from each other by a considerable 
gap. This gap is filled by epicranial aponeurosis.
Skin
Layers of
scalp
Connective tissue
Aponeurotic layer
Loose areolar tissue
Pericranium
Bone of cranial vault 
Vein
Artery
Hair
Nerve
Superior
sagittal sinus
Falx cerebri
Diploic vein
Diploë
Emissary
vein
Fig. 3.3 Occipitofrontalis muscle.
Fig. 3.2 Layers of the scalp.
Temporal branch of 
facial nerve
Posterior
auricular
branch of
facial nerve
Auricle
Occipital bellies
Epicranial
aponeurosis
Frontal bellies
--- Page 63 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
Nerve supply: The occipital belly on each side is supplied by 
posterior auricular branch of facial nerve whereas the frontal 
belly is supplied by temporal branch of the facial nerve.
Actions
1. Alternate contractions of frontal and occipital bellies 
move the scalp forwards and backwards over the vault of 
the skull.
2. Acting from above, the contraction of frontal bellies 
raise the eyebrows as in surprise.
3. Acting from below, the contractions of frontal bellies 
produce transverse wrinkles on the forehead as in fright.
• Surgical layers of the scalp: First three layers of the 
scalp, i.e., skin, connective tissue layer, and aponeurotic 
layer are firmly adhered to each other and cannot be 
separated from each other. These layers are termed 
surgical layers of the scalp and form the scalp proper. 
The layer of loose areolar tissue beneath the aponeurotic 
layer accounts for the free mobility of the scalp proper on 
the underlying bone. Further, it provides an easy plane of 
cleavage in injury and a plane in which blood from severed 
blood vessels can spread for a long distance. When the 
hairs are caught in machinery, the scalp proper is avulsed. 
The Red Indians of bygone days used to remove the scalp 
(proper) of their victims as punishment. It is in this plane 
that surgeons mobilize scalp flaps.
• Black eye: The blood and fluid collecting in the layer of 
loose areolar tissue following a blow on head tracks freely 
under the scalp producing generalized swelling over the 
dome of the skull, but cannot pass into either occipital or 
temple regions because of the bony attachments of the 
occipitofrontalis. The blood and fluid can, however, track 
forward into the eyelids because occipitofrontalis has no 
bony attachment anteriorly (Fig. 3.4). This leads to 
formation of hematoma few hours after a head injury or 
cranial operation causing black discoloration of skin 
around the eyes, a condition called black eye.
It is important to note that the commonest cause of 
black eye is local violence, such as fist fight causing sub-
cutaneous extravasation of blood into the eyelids.
• Dangerous area of the scalp: The layer of loose areolar 
tissue is called dangerous layer of scalp because blood 
and pus freely tend to collect in this layer. If pus collects in 
this layer, the infection may travel readily along emissary 
veins into the intracranial dural venous sinuses leading to 
their thrombosis, which may be fatal.
• Safety-valve hematoma, cephalhematoma and caput 
succedaneum
– Fracture of cranial vault in children may be associated 
with the tearing of dura mater and pericranium. In such 
cases 
blood 
from 
intracranial 
hemorrhage 
communicates with the subaponeurotic space of the 
scalp through the fracture lines. The signs of cerebral 
compression do not develop until the subaponeurotic 
space is fully filled with blood. For this reason the 
collection of blood in the fourth layer is called a safety-
valve hematoma.
Clinical correlation
If cerebrospinal fluid collects in the subaponeurotic 
space, the condition is called cephalhydrocele.
– Cephalhematoma is a subperiosteal collection of blood. 
Since the periosteum of skull loosely covers the bones 
of skull except at the sutural lines where it is firmly 
attached to the sutural membranes, the hematoma is 
bound by suture lines and assumes the shape of related 
bones. It is firm and its edges are well-defined. A 
cephalhematoma is commonly found in the parietal 
region.
– Caput succedaneum is a subcutaneous edema over 
the presenting part of the head at delivery. It takes place 
during the passage of head through the birth canal due 
to interference of the venous return. It is the most 
common form of birth trauma of the scalp and usually 
occurs over the occiput and crosses the suture lines. 
The affected parts of the scalp feel soft and margins are 
partly defined. Generally the edema subsides, in a few 
days.
Frontal belly of 
occipitofrontalis
Eyebrow
Occipital belly of
occipitofrontalis
Blood in the
connective
tissue over the
orbicularis oculi
Upper eyelid
Blood in the loose
areolar tissue
2. Subcutaneous tissue
Scalp
proper
1. Skin
3. Epicranial aponeurosis
Fig. 3.4 Sagittal section of the skull cap and overlying soft 
tissues. Note the migration of blood from 4th layer of the 
scalp (layer of loose areolar tissue) to the scanty subcutaneous 
tissue over orbicularis oculi.
NERVE SUPPLY
A. Sensory supply of the scalp (Fig. 3.5)
The scalp on each side of the midline is supplied by eight 
sensory nerves: four in front of the auricle and four behind 
the auricle. The nerves in front of the auricle are derived 
from trigeminal nerve, whereas those behind the auricle are 
derived from the 2nd and 3rd cervical nerves (Table 3.1).
B. Motor supply of the scalp
The scalp on each side of the midline is supplied by two 
motor nerves: one in front of the ear and one behind the 
ear; both these nerves are derived from the facial nerve 
(Fig. 3.3).
 Nerve in front of the ear is temporal branch of the facial 
nerve. It supplies frontal belly of occipitofrontalis muscle.
--- Page 64 ---
Scalp, Temple, and Face
2. Supraorbital 
artery, 
enters 
scalp 
through 
supraorbital notch 2–3 cm lateral to the supratrochlear 
artery.
3. Superficial temporal artery (the smaller terminal branch 
of the external carotid), enters the scalp in front of the 
root of zygoma and divides into anterior and posterior 
branches.
4. Posterior auricular artery, enters the scalp behind the 
root of the ear.
5. Occipital artery, enters the scalp midway between the 
ear and the external occipital protuberance.
N.B. The first two arteries are the branches of ophthalmic 
artery from internal carotid artery while later three arteries 
are the branches of external carotid artery.
The arteries of one side freely anastomose with one 
another. There is also cross anastomosis between the 
Supratrochlear
Supraorbital
Zygomaticotemporal
Auriculotemporal
Great auricular
(C2, C3)
Lesser occipital
(C2)
Greater occipital (C2)
Third occipital (C3)
Fig. 3.5 Sensory supply of the scalp (shown in left half only).
 Nerve behind the ear is the posterior auricular branch of 
the facial nerve. It supplies occipital belly of occipito-
frontalis muscle.
ARTERIAL SUPPLY
The scalp has very rich blood supply. On each side of midline, 
it is supplied by five arteries: three in front of the auricle and 
two behind the auricle (Table 3.2 and Fig. 3.6).
Site of Entry of Arteries in the Scalp
1. Supratrochlear artery, enters the scalp around 
supraorbital margin one-finger breadth lateral to the 
midline.
Table 3.1 Sensory nerves of the scalp
In front of the auricle (from 
before backwards)
Behind the auricle (from 
before backwards)
Supratrochlear, a branch of 
frontal nerve from ophthalmic 
division of trigeminal nerve
Great auricular, derived from 
ventral rami of 2nd and 3rd 
cervical nerves
Supraorbital, a branch of 
fontal nerve from ophthalmic 
division of trigeminal nerve
Lesser occipital, derived from 
ventral ramus of 2nd cervical 
nerve
Zygomaticotemporal, a 
branch of zygomatic nerve 
from maxillary division of 
trigeminal nerve
Greater occipital, derived from 
dorsal ramus of 2nd cervical 
nerve
Auriculotemporal, a branch of 
mandibular division of 
trigeminal nerve
Third occipital, derived from 
dorsal ramus of 3rd cervical 
nerve
Table 3.2 Arteries supplying the scalp
In front of the auricle
(from before backwards)
Behind the auricle
(from before backwards)
Supratrochlear, a branch of 
ophthalmic artery from 
internal carotid artery
Posterior auricular artery, a 
branch of external carotid 
artery
Supraorbital, a branch of 
ophthalmic artery from 
internal carotid artery
Occipital artery, a branch of 
external carotid artery
Superficial temporal, a branch 
of external carotid artery
Occipital artery
Supratrochlear artery
Supraorbital artery
Temporal flap
Superficial
temporal artery
Posterior auricular artery
Fig. 3.6 Arterial supply of the scalp. The area enclosed by 
blue dotted line shows the temporal flap.
--- Page 65 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
arteries of two sides. Thus the scalp is also the site of potential 
collateral circulation between the external and internal 
carotid arteries.
• The scalp wounds bleed profusely but heal quickly 
due to high vascularity. The avulsed portions of scalp, 
therefore, should not be cut away rather they should be 
placed in position and stitched.
• Since all the arteries supplying the scalp enter it from 
below at the periphery, (i.e., from face and neck) the flaps 
of scalp during craniotomy are made by incisions given in 
the centre and reflected towards the periphery; thereby 
preserving their blood supply. To ensure the blood supply 
of the scalp, the skin incisions should be placed in such a 
way that the base of the flap incorporates the stem of one 
of the arteries supplying the scalp.
• Since all the superficial arteries supplying the scalp 
ascend from face and neck. Therefore life-threatening 
scalp-hemorrhage can be stopped as a first-aid measure, 
by encircling the head just above the ears and eyebrows 
with a string or strong-strap of cotton and tied tightly.
Clinical correlation
VENOUS DRAINAGE
The scalp on each side of the midline is drained by five veins. 
The veins of the scalp accompany the arteries and have 
similar names. These are as follows:
1. Supratrochlear and supraorbital veins: They join each 
other at the medial angle of the eye to form the angular
vein, which continues downwards as the facial vein 
behind the facial artery.
3. Superficial temporal vein: It descends in front of tragus 
to enter the parotid gland where it joins the maxillary 
vein to form the retromandibular vein, which terminates 
by dividing into anterior and posterior divisions. The 
anterior division unites with the facial vein to form 
common facial vein, which drains into the internal 
jugular vein.
4. Posterior auricular vein: It descends behind the auricle 
and unites with the posterior division of the 
retromandibular vein to form the external jugular vein,
which drains into the subclavian vein.
5. Occipital vein: It terminates in the suboccipital venous 
plexus.
The veins of the scalp communicate with intracranial 
dural venous sinuses through emissary veins.
In infants, the veins of the scalp are easily seen deep to the 
skin, hence they are the favored sites for intravenous 
infusion.
Clinical correlation
Emissary Veins
The veins connecting the veins outside the cranium with the 
intracranial dural venous sinuses by passing through 
foramina in the cranium are called emissary veins.
Emissary Veins in the Region of the Scalp
On each side of the midline in the region of the scalp two 
sets of emissary veins are encountered, viz.
1. Parietal emissary vein, which passes through parietal 
foramen and communicates with the superior sagittal 
sinus.
2. Mastoid emissary vein, which passes through mastoid 
foramen and communicates with the sigmoid sinus.
Diploic Veins
The diploic veins are described in detail in Chapter 21.
Diploic veins are thin walled. They are devoid of valves and 
drain the diploë of some cranial bones. They begin to 
develop with diploë at about 2 years of age.
Radiologically they may be seen as relatively transparent 
bands, 3–4 mm wide.
Clinical correlation
LYMPHATIC DRAINAGE
The lymphatics from anterior part of the scalp except the 
lower half of the forehead drain into preauricular (or 
superficial parotid) lymph nodes situated on the surface of 
the parotid gland.
The lymphatics from posterior part of the scalp drain into 
posterior auricular (mastoid) and occipital lymph nodes.
TEMPLE
The area on the side of the skull between the superior 
temporal line and zygomatic arch is popularly known as 
temple. The name temple is supposedly derived from the fact 
that with age (i.e., time) greying of hair occur first in this 
area (tempus = time).
LAYERS OF SOFT TISSUE IN THE TEMPLE
There are six layers of soft tissue in the region of temple. 
From superficial to deep, these are (Fig. 3.7):
1. Skin.
2. Connective tissue.
3. Extension of epicranial aponeurosis.
4. Temporal fascia.
5. Temporalis muscle.
6. Pericranium.
--- Page 66 ---
Scalp, Temple, and Face
Skin and connective tissue: These two layers are same as in 
the region of the scalp.
Extension of epicranial aponeurosis: It gives origin to the 
auricularis anterior and auricularis superior muscles of the 
auricle.
Temporal fascia: It forms a roof over temporal fossa. It is 
attached above to the temporal line and below to the 
zygomatic arch. Inferiorly the temporal fascia splits into two 
layers, which are attached to the inner and outer lips of the 
zygomatic arch. A small gap between the two layers contains 
(a) fat, (b) a branch from superficial temporal artery, and 
(c) zygomaticotemporal nerve.
The superficial surface of temporal fascia is related to: 
(a) superficial temporal vessels, (b) auriculotemporal nerve, 
and (c) temporal branches of the facial nerve.
The deep surface of temporal fascia gives origin to some 
fibres of temporalis muscle.
Temporalis muscle: This large fan-shaped muscle arises 
from the floor of the temporal fossa and inner aspect of 
the temporal fascia. Its fibres converge inferiorly and pass 
deep to the zygomatic arch to be inserted into the coronoid 
process of mandible. (It is described in detail in 
Chapter 10.)
Pericranium: This layer is same as in the region of the scalp.
The temporal fascia is silvery-white thick fibrous sheet, 
which is more or less aponeurotic in character. It is the 
thickest fascia in the body. Morphologically, it represents a 
shell of a bone. In some species (e.g., tortoise), it is replaced 
by bone to make the temporal fossa a bony tunnel.
The temporal fascia is as a graft used by ENT surgeons 
for tympanoplasty (repair of the tympanic membrane).
Clinical correlation
FACE
The face is the front aspect of the head possessing eyes, nose, 
and mouth. It extends superiorly up to the hair line, inferiorly 
up to the chin and base of the mandible and on each side up 
to the auricle. The forehead is common to both the face and 
the scalp. For proper understanding of anatomy of the face, 
one should first study the features on the anterior aspect of 
the skull (norma frontalis) described in Chapter 2 and living 
anatomy described in Chapter 1.
SKIN OF THE FACE
The skin of the face is thick, elastic, and very vascular. It 
contains large number of sweat and sebaceous glands. The 
sweat glands help to regulate the body temperature whereas 
sebaceous glands keep the face oily by their secretion. The 
skin of face is lax except on the nose where it is firmly 
attached to the underlying cartilages and provides insertion 
to the muscles of facial expression.
Since the blood supply to the skin of the face is profuse, 
therefore it is rare in plastic surgery for skin flaps to necrose 
in this region. The laxity of greater part of skin facilitates 
rapid spread of edema in the region of the face. Face is also 
the common site for acne due to the presence of large 
number of sebaceous glands in this region.
Clinical correlation
Cleavage Lines of Skin in the Face (Fig. 3.8)
The direction of cleavage lines in the face varies regionally. 
However, these lines frequently (but not always) coincide 
with natural wrinkle lines of the face. The natural wrinkle 
lines result from repeated folding of the skin perpendicular 
to the long axis of the underlying contracting muscles of 
facial expression. They become prominent in the elderly due 
to loss of youthful skin elasticity.
When the lesions of skin, viz. scars, pigmented patches, 
skin cancers are excised. It is important to give incisions 
along the long axis of natural wrinkle lines and the lesion 
should be enclosed in an ellipse. If the resulting scar is to be 
aesthetically acceptable.
Fig. 3.7 Layers of the soft tissue in the temple.
Hair
Layers of soft tissue in temple
Skin (1)
Connective tissue (2) 
Extension of epicranial
aponeurosis (3)
Temporal fascia (4)
Temporalis muscle (5)
Pericranium (6)
Muscle of auricle
Zygomatic arch
Coronoid process
of mandible
--- Page 67 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
Superficial Fascia
It contains muscles of facial expression, vessels and nerves, 
and variable amount of fat. The fat is absent in the eyelids 
but is well-developed in cheeks forming buccal pad of fat,
which provides rounded contour to cheeks. The buccal pads 
of fat are very prominent in infants in whom they help in 
suckling the milk and are called suctorial pad of fat.
Deep Fascia
The deep fascia is absent in the region of face except over the 
parotid gland and masseter muscle, which are covered by 
parotidomasseteric fascia. The absence of deep fascia in the 
face is essential for the facial expression.
Fig. 3.8 Lines of cleavage in the head and neck region: 
A, front view; B, lateral view.
Platysma
Masseter
Auricularis
anterior
Frontalis
Mentalis
Compressor naris
Procerus
Levator labii superioris
alaeque nasi
Levator labii superioris
Orbicularis oris
Buccinator
Depressor labii inferioris
Levator anguli oris
Epicranial
aponeurosis
Temporal fascia
Auricularis
superior
Occipitalis
Auricularis
posterior
Zygomaticus
minor
Zygomaticus
major
Depressor
anguli oris
Orbicularis oculi
Procerus
Zygomaticus minor
Zygomaticus major
Levator anguli
oris
Mentalis
Platysma
Depressor anguli oris
Masseter (insertion)
Depressor labii
inferioris
Buccinator
Levator labii
superioris
Masseter (origin)
Auricularis
posterior
Occipitalis
Temporalis
Fig. 3.9 Muscles of the facial expression: A, sites of bony attachment; B, position in the face. Masseter (muscle of mastication) 
is also shown.
--- Page 68 ---
Scalp, Temple, and Face
MUSCLES OF FACIAL EXPRESSION
The muscles of facial expression are embedded in the 
superficial fascia. Most of them arise from bones of the skull 
and are inserted into the skin. They bring about different 
types of facial expressions, hence the name muscles of facial 
expression, the actions of many of them are implied by their 
names (Fig. 3.9).
Characteristic Features of the Muscles 
of Facial Expression
The characteristics of the muscles of facial expressions are as 
follows:
1. They lie in superficial fascia and inserted into the skin.
2. Morphologically, 
they 
represent 
specialized 
members of the subcutaneous muscle (panniculus 
carnosus), of lower animals.
3. Embryologically, they develop from mesoderm of 2nd 
pharyngeal arch, hence supplied by facial nerve, the 
nerve of 2nd arch.
4. Functionally, they perform all important functions of 
non-verbal communication in addition to closing and 
opening the orifices in the region of the face.
Location and Function
The facial muscles are arranged in groups around the orifices 
of mouth, eye, and nose as sphincters and dilators of these 
orifices.
In addition to regulating the opening and closing of these 
orifices, as mentioned earlier, they produce different types of 
facial expressions. To perform fine movements of facial 
expressions the facial muscles have small motor units.
Though all these muscles are important for facial 
expression, the students are advised not to burden their 
memory with their attachments. However, they should 
appreciate the importance of orbicularis oculi, orbicularis 
oris, and buccinator for the serious consequences following 
their paralysis.
N.B. In addition to muscles around the eye, nose, and 
mouth, the muscles of facial expression also include the 
muscles of scalp, auricle and the subcutaneous muscle of 
the neck—the platysma.
Muscles Around the Orifice of the Eye
These include:
1. Orbicularis oculi.
2. Corrugator supercilii.
3. Frontalis.
4. Levator palpebrae superioris.
Orbicularis oculi It consists of three parts—orbital, 
palpebral, and lacrimal.
1. Orbital part—arises from medial palpebral ligament, 
frontal process of maxilla, and adjoining part of the 
frontal bone. The fibres form complete elliptical loops 
on and around the orbital margin, without interruption 
before returning to their point of origin.
It closes the eye tightly to protect the eye from intense light 
and dust particles. It is also used by people for winking.
2. Palpebral part—arises from medial palpebral ligament 
and sweeps laterally over the upper and lower eyelids to 
be inserted into the lateral palpebral ligament. A small 
group of fibres called ciliary bundle lie along the margins 
of both eyelids.
It closes the eyelids gently as in sleep or in blinking.
3. Lacrimal part—lies behind the lacrimal sac. It arises 
from posterior lacrimal crest and lacrimal fascia forming 
a sheath of lacrimal sac that passes laterally in front of 
tarsal plates of both eyelids to be inserted into the lateral 
palpebral raphe.
It dilates the lacrimal sac by exerting traction on the 
lacrimal fascia, thus helping in the drainage of lacrimal 
fluid.
• Crow’s feet: The contraction of entire orbicularis oculi 
draws the skin of forehead, temple, and cheek towards 
the lateral angle of the eye, producing radiating skin folds 
from the lateral angle of the eye, which may be a 
permanent feature in some old people forming the so 
called crow’s feet.
• Ectropion: The paralysis of orbicularis oculi results in 
drooping of the lower eyelid (ectropion) causing spilling of 
tear on the cheek (epiphora).
Clinical correlation
Corrugator supercilii: It arises from the medial end of the 
superciliary arch, passes laterally and upwards to be inserted 
into the skin of the eyebrow above the middle of the 
supraorbital margin.
It drags the eyebrow medially and downwards producing 
vertical wrinkles on the forehead as in frowning, an 
expression of annoyance.
Frontalis: It is already described in the section on scalp. The 
frontalis elevates the eyebrows and produces transverse 
wrinkles on the forehead as an expression of surprise, horror 
or fright.
Levator palpebra superioris: It is not a muscle of the face 
but one of the orbital muscles, hence described in detail 
under orbit (Chapter 19). Levator palpebrae superioris is an 
antagonist to the sphincteric action of palpebral part of 
orbicularis oculi. It elevates the upper eyelid.
Muscles Around the Nasal Cavity
The muscles associated with nasal cavity are as follows:
1. Procerus.
--- Page 69 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
2. Nasalis.
3. Depressor septi.
These muscles are poorly developed because anterior 
nares are open.
Procerus: It arises from nasal bone, passes upwards to be 
inserted into the skin of the lower part of the forehead.
It produces transverse wrinkles across the bridge (root) of the 
nose as in frowning.
Nasalis: It consists of two parts: transverse part called 
compressor naris and alar part called dilator naris.
1. Compressor naris arises form maxilla close to the nasal 
notch, passes upwards and medially to form an 
aponeurosis across the bridge of nose where it becomes 
continuous with its counterpart on the opposite side.
It compresses the nasal aperture.
2. Dilator naris arises from maxilla from the margin of the 
nasal notch and inserted into the lateral part of the ala of 
the nose.
It dilates the anterior nasal apertures as in deep inspira-
tion. It also expresses the anger (sign of omega).
Depressor septi: It arises from the incisive fossa of the 
maxilla and is inserted into the lower mobile part of the 
nasal septum.
It fixes the nasal septum to allow dilatation of anterior nasal 
aperture by dilator naris.
Muscles Around the Mouth
The muscles around the mouth are responsible for the 
movement of lips and cheek. These include:
1. Orbicularis oris: Acts as sphincter.
2. Nine muscles converging around the mouth act as 
dilators.
Orbicularis Oris (Fig. 3.10)
This complex muscle surrounds the oral orifice and forms 
the greater part of the lips. It has extrinsic and intrinsic 
portions. The major extrinsic (or superficial) portion is 
composed of interlacing fibres of the muscles which converge 
around the mouth for their insertion into the lips, viz. levator 
anguli oris, depressor anguli oris, buccinator, etc. Most of the 
fibres come from buccinator. The fibres of buccinator 
converge towards the modiolus. At modiolus they form 
chiasma. The uppermost and lowermost fibres pass straight 
into their respective lips, whereas the middle fibres decussate, 
so that the upper fibres pass into the lower lip, and lower into 
the upper lip.
The intrinsic portion consists of fibres running obliquely 
between the skin and mucus membrane of the lips, and 
incisive slips, which pass laterally into the lips from the jaws 
adjacent to the incisor teeth and interlace with the fibres of 
peripheral part of orbicularis oris as they approach the 
modiolus.
Nerve supply
Buccal branch of the facial nerve.
Actions
Because of its complex nature, orbicularis oris is capable of 
producing wide variety of movements of lips such as closing, 
pouting, pursing, twisting, etc.
Paralysis of orbicularis oris: The paralysis of one-half of 
orbicularis oris prevents the proper closure of lips on that 
side. Consequently the speech is slurred and the saliva 
escapes between the lips at the angle of the mouth (drib-
bling of saliva from the angle of the mouth).
Clinical correlation
Nine Muscles Converging Around the Mouth
These are as follows:
1. Levator labii superioris alaeque nasi.
2. Levator labii superioris.
3. Levator anguli oris.
4. Zygomaticus minor.
5. Zygomaticus major.
6. Depressor labii inferioris.
7. Depressor anguli oris.
8. Risorius.
9. Buccinator.
Depressor
anguli oris
Levator anguli oris
Zygomaticus
major
Buccinator
Modiolus
Risorius
Uppermost
fibres
Middle fibres
Lowermost
fibres
Incisive slips
Incisive slips
of buccinator
Fig. 3.10 Orbicularis oris muscle: A, arrangement of fibres; 
B, formation of modiolus.
--- Page 70 ---
Scalp, Temple, and Face
The muscle of chin called mentalis is usually discussed 
with muscles around the mouth.
 Levator labii superioris alaeque nasi arises from the 
frontal process of the maxilla and is inserted into the ala 
of nose by one slip and to the upper lip by another slip.
It elevates the upper lip and helps to dilate the nostril.
 Levator labii superioris arises from maxilla just above the 
infraorbital foramen and is inserted into the upper lip.
It elevates the upper lip.
 Levator anguli oris arises from maxilla below the 
infraorbital foramen and is inserted into the angle of the 
mouth. It lies deep to levator labii superioris.
It raises the angle of the mouth.
 Zygomaticus minor arises from zygomatic bone and is 
inserted into the upper lip.
It elevates the upper lip.
 Zygomaticus major arises from zygomatic bone and is 
inserted into the angle of the mouth.
It draws the angle of the mouth upward and laterally.
 Depressor labii inferioris arises from the anterior oblique 
line of the mandible and is inserted into the lower lip.
It draws the lower lip downwards and somewhat laterally.
 Depressor anguli oris arises from the posterior part of the 
oblique line of the mandible and is inserted into the angle 
of the mouth.
It draws the angle of the mouth downwards and laterally.
 Risorius arises from parotid fascia as a continuation of 
posterior fibres of platysma and is inserted into the angle 
of the mouth.
It retracts the angle of the mouth gently.
 Mentalis, a small conical muscle arises from the incisive 
fossa of the mandible and is inserted into the skin of the 
lower lip.
It puckers the chin and protrudes the lower lip.
 Buccinator (Bugler’s muscle/trumpeter’s muscle) is 
muscle of the cheek and needs to be discussed in detail 
(Fig. 3.11).
Origin: The buccinator arises from the following 4 sites:
1. Outer surface of the alveolar process of maxilla opposite 
three molar teeth.
2. Fibrous band that extends from pterygoid hamulus to 
maxillary tuberosity (pterygomaxillary raphe).
3. Pterygomandibular 
raphe, 
which 
extends 
from 
pterygoid hamulus to the mandible behind the third 
molar tooth.
4. Outer surface of the alveolar process of mandible
opposite three molar teeth.
After origin, the fibres run towards the mouth and fill the 
gap between the upper and lower jaws. The fibres are 
arranged into upper, intermediate, and lower groups.
Insertion: The buccinator is inserted in a complicated 
manner into the upper and lower lips.
On reaching near the angle of the mouth:
(a) upper fibres pass into upper lip,
(b) lower fibres pass into the lower lip, and 
(c) intermediate fibres decussate and as a result upper fibres 
of this group pass into lower lip and lower fibres pass 
into the upper lip.
Nerve supply: Buccal branches of facial nerve.
Actions:
1. It flattens the cheek against the gum and teeth, and thus 
prevents the accumulation of food in the vestibule of 
mouth during mastication.
2. It is responsible for blowing the cheek and expelling the 
air between the lips from inflated vestibule as in blowing 
the trumpet (hence the name trumpeter’s muscle).
N.B. The outer surface of buccinator muscle is covered by 
buccopharyngeal fascia and its inner surface is lined by a 
mucus membrane. It is pierced by parotid duct. The 
pterygomandibular raphe separates it from superior 
constrictor of the pharynx. A gap between maxillary fibres 
and those from pterygomaxillary raphe provides passage to 
the tendon of tensor palati.
Fig. 3.11 Buccinator muscle: A, origin; B, location in the 
face and insertion.
Pterygoid hamulus
Tendinous
arch (2)
Maxillary
tuberosity
Outer
surface of
alveolar
process of
maxilla (1)
Outer surface of
alveolar process
of mandible (4)
Pterygomandibular
raphe (3)
Parotid duct
Buccopharyngeal
fascia
Buccinator
muscle
--- Page 71 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
• Paralysis of buccinator muscle: If the buccinator 
muscle is paralyzed, as it occurs in facial palsy, the food 
accumulates in the vestibule of mouth during mastication 
and the person cannot blow his cheek.
• Modiolus: It is a dense, compact, mobile, fibromuscular 
mass situated about 1.25 cm lateral to the angle of the 
mouth. It is formed due to interlacing of fibres of five 
muscles which converge towards the angle of the mouth. 
These muscles (modiolar muscles) are: levator anguli 
oris, zygomaticus major, buccinator, depressor anguli oris 
and risorius (Fig. 3.10B).
It can be easily palpated by using opposed thumb and 
index 
finger 
compress 
skin 
mucosa 
simultaneously. The pulsations of facial artery can be felt 
just lateral to the modiolus. The inadvertent damage of 
modiolus during plastic surgery leads to unacceptable 
facial asymmetry.
Clinical correlation
Facial Muscles and Emotional Expressions
The facial muscles responsible for important emotional 
expressions are presented in Table 3.3.
Clinical Testing of the Muscles of Facial Expression
The muscles of facial expression are involved in facial nerve 
lesion. They are tested clinically in the following ways:
 Frontalis, by asking the patient to look upwards without 
moving his head and then look for horizontal wrinkles on 
the forehead.
 Corrugator supercilii, by asking the patient to frown and 
then look for vertical wrinkles between the two eyebrows.
 Orbicularis oculi, by asking the patient to close the eyes 
tightly.
 Orbicularis oris, by asking the patient to whistle.
 Dilators of the mouth, by asking the patient to show his 
teeth.
 Buccinator, by asking the patient to puff his mouth and 
then blow out the air forcefully.
 Zygomaticus major, by asking the patient to laugh.
 Risorius, by asking the patient to smile gently.
NERVE SUPPLY
Motor Nerve Supply (Fig. 3.12)
The motor nerve supply of the face is derived from the 
facial nerve. After coming out of cranial cavity through 
stylomastoid foramen, the facial nerve wind around the 
lateral aspect of styloid process and then enters the parotid 
gland. Here it divides into five terminal branches (viz. 
temporal, zygomatic, buccal, marginal mandibular, and 
cervical), which emerge in the face radiating through the 
anterior border of the parotid gland and supply the muscles 
of facial expression (Table 3.4). These five sets of terminal 
branches form the goose-foot pattern (pes anserinus) on the 
face (also see p. 117). The facial nerve is described in detail 
in Chapter 22.
N.B. The general course of five terminal branches of facial 
nerve can be easily remembered by putting the palm of 
your hand over the auricle and spreading the five digits 
(Fig. 3.13). The five digits represent the five terminal 
branches of the facial nerve.
Table 3.3 Facial muscles and emotional expressions
Emotional expression
Presenting features
Facial muscle/muscles
Surprise/horror/fright
Transverse wrinkles of the forehead
Frontalis 
Frowning
• Vertical wrinkles of the forehead 
• Transverse wrinkle across the root of nose
• Corrugator supercilii 
• Procerus
Anger
• Dilation of the anterior nasal aperture
• Depression of lower mobile part of the nasal septum
• Dilator naris
• Depressor septi
Laughing
Angle of mouth drawn upwards and laterally
Zygomaticus major
Sadness/sorrow/grief
• Accentuation of nasolabial fold 
• Elevation and eversion of the upper lip
• Levator labii superioris 
• Levator anguli oris and 
zygomaticus minor
• Angle of mouth drawn downwards and laterally
• Depressor anguli oris
Grinning
Retraction of angle of the mouth laterally
Risorius
Disdain/doubt
Puckering of the chin, protrusion of lower lip
Mentalis
Worry
Skin folds radiating laterally from lateral angle of the eye
Orbicularis oculi
Irony
Angle of the mouth drawn downwards and somewhat laterally
Depressor labii inferioris
--- Page 72 ---
Scalp, Temple, and Face
Fig. 3.12 Motor supply of the muscles of facial expression. Auricular muscles are not shown as they have no role in the facial 
expression in human beings (CF = cervicofacial trunk, MP = mastoid process, TF = temporofacial trunk).
Mentalis
Zygomatic
Temporal
Styloid process
Facial nerve
 Facial canal
Stylomastoid foramen
Upper buccal
Lower buccal
Cervical
Marginal mandibular
Buccinator
Risorius
Depressor anguli oris
Frontalis
Corrugator supercilii
Orbicularis oris
Levator labii superioris
alaeque nasi
Levator labii superioris
Compressor naris
Levator anguli oris
Zygomaticus
major
Orbicularis oculi
Zygomaticus minor
Depressor labii inferioris
Platysma
Bell’s palsy (Fig. 3.14): It is lower motor neuron type 
paralysis of facial muscles due to compression of facial 
nerve in the facial canal near stylomastoid foramen. The 
exact etiology is not known but it is probably due to viral 
infection.
Clinical correlation
Characteristic Features on the Side of Paralysis (Fig. 3.14)
1. Facial asymmetry (affected side is drawn to the healthy 
side)—due to unopposed action of muscles of normal 
side.
2. Loss of horizontal wrinkles on forehead—due to paralysis 
of occipitofrontalis muscle.
3. Widening of palpebral fi ssure and inability to close the 
eye—due to paralysis of orbicularis oculi.
4. Tears flow down from the eye (epiphora)—due to 
paralysis of the lower part of the orbicularis oculi.
5. Sagging of the angle of the mouth towards the affected 
side and inability of the angle of the mouth to move 
upwards and laterally during laughing—due to paralysis 
of zygomaticus major.
6. Loss of nasolabial furrow—due to paralysis of levator 
labii superioris alaeque nasi.
7. Accumulation of food into the vestibule of the mouth—
due to paralysis of buccinator muscle.
8. Dribbling of saliva from the angle of the mouth—due to 
paralysis of orbicularis oris.
9. Loss of resistance when one presses cheek with inflated 
vestibule and air leaks out from between the lips—due to 
paralysis of buccinator muscle.
N.B. In upper motor neuron type paralysis of facial 
muscles due to involvement of the pyramidal tract, the 
upper part of the face is not affected. This part of face 
remains normal because lower motor neurons supplying 
this part of face receive corticonuclear fibres (upper 
motor neurons) from cerebral cortex of the both sides 
(bilateral cortical innervation; for detail see Chapter 22).
Fig. 3.13 Lateral view of the face illustrating the simple method 
of remembering the terminal branches of the facial nerve.
Temporal
Zygomatic
Buccal
Mandibular
Cervical
--- Page 73 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
Sensory Nerve Supply
The trigeminal nerve is the sensory nerve of the face because 
it supplies the whole of the face, except skin over the angle of 
mandible, which is supplied by great auricular nerve derived 
from ventral rami of the 2nd and 3rd cervical nerves 
(C2, C3).
The upper one-third face (developing from frontonasal 
process) is supplied by ophthalmic division, middle third of 
face (developing from maxillary processes) is supplied by 
maxillary division and lower third of face (developing from 
mandibular processes) is supplied by mandibular division of 
the trigeminal nerve.
The territories of cutaneous innervation of ophthalmic, 
maxillary, and mandibular nerves are not horizontal, but 
curved in the posterosuperior direction, indicating the 
direction of growth of brain and head (Fig. 3.15). Thus the 
original beard area has been drawn up to the temple and 
necessarily the neck skin is drawn up to overlap the angle of 
the mandible. This explains the innervation of face by the 
2nd cervical nerve (C2).
The cutaneous nerves of the face derived from three 
divisions of the trigeminal nerve are as follows (Fig. 3.16):
Fig. 3.14 Bell’s palsy on the right side. Note the facial 
asymmetry (right side appears to be pulled on the left side).
Loss of wrinkles
on forehead
Inability to
close eye
Overflow of
tears on cheek
Face pulled 
to healthy side
(facial asymmetry)
Loss of
nasolabial fold
Drooling of saliva
from angle of mouth
Fig. 3.15 Sensory innervation of the face. Note trigeminal 
and spinal fields (V1  =  ophthalmic division of trigeminal 
nerve, V2  =  maxillary division of trigeminal nerve, 
V3 = mandibular division of trigeminal nerve).
Fig. 3.16 Sensory nerves of the face.
C2, C3
Supraorbital n.
Supratrochlear n.
Lacrimal n.
(palpebral branch)
Infratrochlear
External nasal n.
Infraorbital n.
Zygomaticofacial n.
Mental n.
Buccal n.
Great auricular n.
Auriculotemporal n.
Zygomaticotemporal n.
Table 3.4 Innervation of muscles of facial expression by the 
terminal branches of facial nerve
Terminal branches of 
facial nerve
Muscles innervated
Temporal branch
• Upper part of the orbicularis oculi
• Frontalis
• Corrugator supercilii
Zygomatic branch
Lower part of the orbicularis oculi
Buccal branches
(a) upper buccal 
branch
• Zygomaticus major and minor
• Levator anguli oris
• Levator labii superioris 
• Levator labii superioris alaeque nasi
• Muscles of the nose
(b) lower buccal 
branch
• Buccinator
• Orbicularis oris
Marginal mandibular 
branch
• Risorius
• Depressor anguli oris
• Depressor labii inferioris 
• Mentalis
Cervical branch
Platysma
--- Page 74 ---
Scalp, Temple, and Face
Supraorbital
Supratrochlear
Infratrochlear
External nasal
Lacrimal
Branches of ophthalmic
division of trigeminal nerve
Infraorbital
Zygomaticofacial
Zygomaticotemporal
Branches of maxillary
division of trigeminal nerve
Mental
Buccal
Auriculo-temporal
Branches of mandibular
division of trigeminal nerve
• Trigeminal neuralgia (tic douloureux): It is a clinical 
condition characterized by sudden paroxysmal attacks of 
lancinating pain lasting from few hours to several days, 
confined to distribution of one or more divisions of 
trigeminal nerve. It commonly starts in the maxillary 
territory and more frequently on the right side.
• Herpes zoster ophthalmicus: It is a viral infection involv-
ing the ophthalmic nerve. It presents as severe pain and 
edema in the ophthalmic territory and is characterized by 
the appearance of vesicles along the course of cutaneous 
branches of the ophthalmic nerve.
Clinical correlation
ARTERIAL SUPPLY
The face is the highly vascular region and is supplied by the 
following arteries (Fig. 3.17):
1. Facial artery.
2. Transverse facial artery.
3. Arteries that accompany the cutaneous nerves.
The main arterial supply to the face is by the facial artery,
hence it is called chief artery of the face.
Facial Artery
It arises from external carotid artery in the neck at the level 
of greater cornu of the hyoid bone, and after a looped course 
in the submandibular region, it enters the face by winding 
around the lower border of the mandible at the anteroinferior 
angle of the masseter by piercing the investing layer of deep 
cervical fascia.
In the face, the artery passes tortuously, first upwards and 
forwards to a point 1.25 cm lateral to the angle of the mouth 
and then ascends along the side of the nose to the medial 
angle of the eye where it ends by anastomosing with the 
dorsal nasal branch of ophthalmic artery. The terminal part of 
facial artery is called angular artery.
The course and branches of facial artery in the neck is 
described in Chapter 16.
Branches of the Facial Artery in the Face
In the face it gives three sets of named branches, viz.
1. Inferior labial artery, to supply the lower lip.
2. Superior labial artery, to supply the upper lip.
3. Lateral nasal artery, to supply the ala and dorsum of the 
nose. All these branches arise anteriorly.
4. Muscular branches, are small, unnamed and arise from 
the posterior aspect of the artery.
N.B.
• The tortuosity of facial artery prevents its walls from 
being unduly stretched during the movements of 
mandible, lips, and cheeks.
• The facial artery takes part in the formation of numerous 
anastomoses, viz.
– Across the midline with the branches of the opposite 
side. In the lips, the anastomoses between the superior 
and inferior labial arteries of two sides are large and so 
efficient that if cut blood spurts from both cut ends.
– At the medial angle of eye, it anastomoses with the 
branches of ophthalmic artery, a branch of internal 
carotid artery and hence the site of anastomosis between 
the branches of external and internal carotid arteries.
• Since the face is richly vascular, the wounds of face bleed 
profusely but fortunately they heal quickly.
• The pulsations of facial artery can be felt at two sites, viz.
– At the base of the mandible close to anteroinferior 
angle of the masseter.
– About 1.25 cm lateral to the angle of the mouth.
Clinical correlation
Supraorbital a.
Supratrochlear a.
Dorsal nasal
branch of
ophthalmic a.
Lateral nasal a.
Transverse facial a.
Angular artery
External nasal a.
Superior labial a.
Inferior labial a.
Mental a.
Facial artery
Buccal a.
Parotid duct
Masseter
Parotid gland
Superficial
temporal
artery
Fig. 3.17 Arterial supply of the face (1 = zygomaticotemporal, 
2 = zygomaticofacial, 3 = infraorbital, 4 = palpebral branch of 
lacrimal artery).
--- Page 75 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
Transverse Facial Artery
It is a small artery that arises from superficial temporal 
artery, within the parotid gland. After emerging from parotid 
gland it runs forwards on the masseter between the zygomatic 
arch and the parotid duct accompanied by buccal branch of 
the facial nerve.
Arteries Accompanying the Cutaneous Nerves
They are small and usually go unnoticed but some of them 
can be easily seen, viz. infraorbital artery, buccal artery, and 
mental artery. Note, they all are derived from maxillary 
artery.
VENOUS DRAINAGE (Fig. 3.18)
The venous blood from the face is drained by two veins (Fig. 
3.18), viz.
1. Facial vein.
2. Retromandibular vein.
Facial Vein
It is the largest vein of the face. It is formed at the medial 
angle of the eye by the union of supratrochlear and 
supraorbital veins. After formation, it runs straight 
downwards and backwards behind the facial artery to reach 
the anteroinferior angle of the masseter. Here it pierces the 
deep fascia, crosses superficial to submandibular gland and 
joins the anterior division of retromandibular vein below the 
angle of the mandible to form the common facial vein, which 
drains into the internal jugular vein.
The tributaries of facial vein correspond to the branches 
of facial artery.
Deep Connections
The facial vein communicates with the cavernous sinus 
through the following two routes:
1. At the point of commencement, the facial vein commu-
nicates with the superior ophthalmic vein, which passes 
backwards within the orbit and drains into cavernous 
sinus.
2. In the cheek, the facial vein is joined to the pterygoid 
venous plexus by the deep facial vein. The deep facial 
vein passes backwards over the buccinator deep to the 
ramus of the mandible and communicates with the 
pterygoid venous plexus around the lateral pterygoid 
muscle, which in turn communicates with the cavernous 
sinus through an emissary vein.
Dangerous area of the face (Fig. 3.19): The facial vein and 
its communications are devoid of valves in their lumens. 
Since facial vein rests directly on the muscles of facial 
expression, the movements of these muscles may facilitate 
the spread of septic emboli from infected area of the lower 
part of the nose, upper lip, and adjoining part of the cheek in 
retrograde direction through deep facial vein, pterygoid 
venous plexus, and emissary vein into the cavernous sinus 
leading to meningitis and cavernous sinus thrombosis. For 
this reason, this portion of the face is called dangerous area 
of the face.
Clinical correlation
Supratrochlear vein
Supraorbital vein
Cavernous sinus
Maxillary vein
Pterygoid venous plexus
Emissary vein
Facial vein
Common facial vein
Internal jugular vein
Subclavian vein
External jugular vein
Anterior division of
retromandibular vein
Deep facial vein
Superficial temporal vein
Posterior auricular vein
Retromandibular vein
Posterior division of
retromandibular vein
Fig. 3.18 Venous drainage of the face.
--- Page 76 ---
Scalp, Temple, and Face
Retromandibular Vein 
The retromandibular vein is formed by the union of the 
superficial temporal and the maxillary vein within the 
parotid gland. On leaving the parotid gland, it divides into 
two divisions: anterior and posterior. The anterior division 
joins the facial vein to form the common facial vein, whereas 
posterior division joins the posterior auricular vein to form 
the external jugular vein.
LYMPHATIC DRAINAGE (Fig. 3.20)
The face is divided into three lymphatic territories, viz.
1. Upper territory—comprising greater part of the fore-
head, later halves of the eyelids including conjunctiva, 
parotid area, and adjoining part of the cheek.
Lymph from upper territory is drained into preauricular 
lymph nodes (also called superficial parotid lymph nodes).
2. Middle territory—comprising central part of the fore-
head, medial halves of the eyelids, external nose, upper 
lip, lateral part of lower lip, medial part of cheek, and 
greater part of the lower jaw.
Lymph from middle territory is drained into subman-
dibular lymph nodes.
3. Lower territory—comprising central part of the lower 
lip and chin.
Lymph from lower territory is drained into submental
lymph nodes.
EYELIDS
The eyelids, also called palpebrae, are movable curtains in 
front of the eyeball. They protect the eye from injury, foreign 
bodies, and bright light. They also keep the cornea moist and 
clean. The space between the two eyelids is called palpebral 
fissure. The lateral angle of the palpebral fissure where two 
eyelids meet is called lateral canthus of the eye and medial 
angle of the palpebral fissure where two eyelids meet is called 
medial canthus of the eye.
The free margin of each eyelid is divided into two parts: 
(a) Lateral 5/6th ciliary part, which is flat and possesses 
eyelashes and (b) medial 1/6th lacrimal part, which is round 
and does not possess cilia (Fig. 3.21).
STRUCTURE 
Each eyelid consists of five layers (Fig. 3.22). From without 
inwards these are:
1. Skin.
2. Superficial fascia.
3. Orbicularis oculi (palpebral fibres).
4. Tarsal plate and palpebral fascia.
5. Conjunctiva.
Fig. 3.21 Free margins of the eyelids.
Fig. 3.19 Dangerous area of the face.
Fig. 3.20 Lymphatic drainage of the scalp and face.
Dangerous
area of 
face
Submental
lymph nodes
Submandibular
lymph nodes
Preauricular lymph
nodes
Occipital
lymph nodes
Lacrimal part
(medial 1/6th)
Ciliary part
(lateral 5/6th)
Lateral
canthus
Palpebral
fissure
Medial
canthus
--- Page 77 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
Skin: The skin of eyelids is very thin and without hair except 
at the lid margin. At the lid margin, it becomes continuous 
with the conjunctiva.
Superficial fascia: The superficial fascia of eyelids is thin, 
loose and devoid of fat. It allows the skin to move freely over 
the lid, and can become greatly swollen with fluid or blood 
after injury.
Orbicularis oculi: The fibres of palpebral part of orbicularis 
oculi sweep across the eyelids parallel to the palpebral fissure. 
A layer of loose areolar tissue lies deep to these fibres and in 
the upper eyelid it is continuous with the subaponeurotic 
space of the scalp.
Tarsal plate and palpebral fascia (Fig. 3.23): The tarsi are 
two thin plates of condensed fibrous tissue, which form the 
skeleton of the eyelids and provide them stiffness. The inferior 
tarsal plate is a narrow strip attached to the inferior orbital 
margin by palpebral fascia. The superior tarsal plate is much 
larger and diamond shaped and can be felt if the upper lid is 
pinched sideways between finger and thumb.
The medial ends of tarsi are attached to lacrimal crest of 
maxilla in front of lacrimal sac by a strong fibrous band 
called medial palpebral ligament and lateral ends of tarsi to 
a tubercle of zygomatic bone (Whitnall’s tubercle) by lateral 
palpebral ligament.
The large modified sebaceous glands (Meibomian or 
tarsal glands) are partly embedded on the deeper aspects of 
the tarsal plates. These glands are arranged in a single row 
and their ducts open into the lid margin by minute foramina 
behind the eyelashes.
The tarsal glands secrete oily fluid that reduces evapora-
tion of tears and prevent them from overflowing onto the 
cheek.
The ciliary glands are arranged in several rows immedi-
ately behind the root of eyelashes. Their ducts open on the 
lid margin close to the lashes.
The ciliary glands are of two types: (a) glands of Zeis,
which are modified sebaceous glands and open into the fol-
licles of eyelashes, and (b) glands of Moll, which are modi-
fied sweat glands. They also open into the follicles of the 
eyelashes.
The palpebral fascia of upper eyelid is attached above to 
the superior orbital margin and below to the anterior surface 
of the tarsal plate some distance away from its upper border.
The palpebral fascia is the thin fibrous membrane, which 
connects the tarsi to the orbital margins and forms the 
orbital septum with them. Medially it passes posterior to the 
lacrimal sac and attached to the posterior margin of the 
lacrimal groove, which lodges the lacrimal sac.
The upper palpebral fascia in the upper lid is pierced by:
1. fibres of levator palpebrae superioris,
2. palpebral part of lacrimal gland, and
3. nerves and vessels that pass from orbit to the face.
Conjunctiva (palpebral part): It is a transparent mucus 
membrane, which lines the inner surface of each eyelid. 
About 2 mm from the edge of each eyelid the palpebral 
conjunctiva presents a groove where foreign bodies 
frequently lodge.
• Ptosis: It is the drooping of the upper eyelid due to 
paralysis of levator palpebrae superioris following lesion 
of occulomotor nerve, which supplies this muscle.
• Stye (hordeolum): It is the suppurative inflammation of 
the Zeis gland. In this condition, the gland is swollen, 
hard, and painful. The pus points near the base of the 
cilia, hence can be easily drained by plucking the cilia.
• Chalazion: It is the inflammation of the tarsal (Meibomian 
gland). It causes localized swelling on the inner aspect of 
the eyelid.
• Blepharitis: It is the inflammation of the eyelids mostly 
involving lid margins.
Clinical correlation
ARTERIAL SUPPLY
The arterial supply is by medial palpebral branches of 
ophthalmic artery and lateral palpebral branches of lacrimal 
artery. These branches form an arterial arch in each eyelid.
Fig. 3.22 Structure of the eyelid (sagittal section of upper 
eyelid).
Eyelash (cilia)
Smooth muscle
(Muller’s muscle)
Skeletal muscle
Levator palpebrae
superioris
Superior fornix
of conjunctiva
Bulbar conjunctiva
Tarsal plate
Palpebral conjunctiva
Tarsal gland
Palpebral fascia
(orbital septum)
Palpebral part
of orbicularis 
oculi
Follicle of 
eyelash
Gland of Zeis
Gland of Moll
Eyebrow
Skin of eyelid
Superficial fascia
Whitnall’s
tubercle
Levator palpebrae
superioris
Superior tarsal
plate
Lacrimal fossa in
the medial wall
of bony orbit
Medial palpebral
ligament
Inferior tarsal
plate
Palpebral
fissure
Lateral
palpebral
ligament
Palpebral fascia
(orbital septum)
Fig. 3.23 Tarsal plates and palpebral fascia.
--- Page 78 ---
Scalp, Temple, and Face
VENOUS DRAINAGE
The venous blood from eyelids is drained into ophthalmic 
and facial veins.
LYMPHATIC DRAINAGE
The lymph from medial halves of lid is drained into 
submandibular lymph nodes and from lateral halves into the 
preauricular lymph nodes.
PALPEBRAL FISSURE
When the eye is open, the eyelids are separated by an ellipti-
cal fissure called palpebral fissure.
Features seen through palpebral fissure (Fig. 3.24)
1. Lacus lacrimalis, a small triangular space in the medial 
part with reddish fleshy looking elevation in its centre 
called lacrimal caruncle.
2. Plica semilunaris, a small curved fold of conjunctiva 
immediately lateral to lacrimal caruncle. It represents 
nictitating membrane of lower animals.
3. Cornea and pupil, present in its center. Note that upper 
one-seventh of the cornea is overlapped by the upper 
eyelid.
4. Sclera of eye ball, seen as white areas on either side of 
cornea.
DEVELOPMENT
Above and below the cornea, the eyelids develop as folds of 
skin, which come together and adhere along their edges 
during the third month of intrauterine life. The space 
between the folds and the cornea is the conjunctival sac.
When the eyelids separate, the palpebral fissure is estab-
lished.
The orbital septum develops from mesodermal core in the 
skin folds. When the eyelids are closed, the orbital septum 
from orbital margin to the eyelids forms a complete 
diaphragm of the orbital cavity; the medial part of orbital 
septum passes behind the lacrimal sac and is attached to the 
lacrimal bone. This attachment produces sharp posterior 
lacrimal crest.
• Surgical operations on the lacrimal sac, therefore, are 
always anterior (outside) to the orbital cavity proper 
because orbital septum passes behind the lacrimal sac to 
gain attachment on the posterior lacrimal crest.
• The condensation and thickening of orbital septum within 
the developing eyelids forms the tarsal plates.
Clinical correlation
CONJUNCTIVA
The conjunctiva is a thin transparent mucus membrane, 
which lines the inner surfaces of eyelids (palpebral 
conjunctiva) and the front of sclera and cornea of eyeball 
(bulbar conjunctiva). The potential space between eyelids 
and eyeball when eyes are closed is called conjunctival sac.
The lines of reflexion between palpebral and bulbar 
conjunctiva above and below form the superior and inferior 
fornices, respectively.
The palpebral conjunctiva is highly vascular and firmly 
adherent to the tarsal plates. On the other hand, bulbar 
conjunctiva is loose over the sclera but firmly adherent to the 
cornea forming its anterior epithelium (the corneal 
epithelium). The conjunctiva contains mucus-secreting 
goblet cells.
Conjunctival Fluid
The conjunctival sac is filled with three films of fluid from 
within outwards these are:
1. Watery from lacrimal fluids.
2. Mucus from conjunctiva.
3. Oily from tarsal glands.
The blinking movements of eyelids make these films 
moisten cornea and help drain the conjunctival fluid into 
nasal cavity.
• The inflammation of conjunctiva (conjunctivitis) due to 
infection or allergy is one of the commonest diseases of 
the eye. Trachoma is a granular conjunctivitis caused by 
trachoma virus. It is contagious and considered as the 
commonest cause of blindness in India.
• It is usual for physician to examine palpebral conjunctiva 
for anemia and bulbar conjunctiva for jaundice.
Clinical correlation
Fig. 3.24 Features of the palpebral fissure.
Sclera 
Cornea
Lacrimal papilla
Pupil
Lacrimal punctum
Lacrimal caruncle
Lacus lacrimalis
Plica semilunaris
Openings of ciliary glands 
(along the anterior edge of 
lid margin)
Openings of tarsal glands
(along the posterior edge of 
lid margin)
Cilia (eyelashes)
--- Page 79 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
Nerve Supply
The conjunctiva is supplied by the following nerves:
1. Palpebral conjunctiva of upper eyelid and ocular 
conjunctiva—by ophthalmic nerve.
2. Palpebral conjunctiva of lower eyelid—by maxillary 
nerve.
Arterial Supply
The conjunctiva is supplied by palpebral and anterior ciliary 
arteries derived from ophthalmic artery.
Venous Drainage
The venous blood from palpebral conjunctiva is drained into 
facial vein while from ocular conjunctiva into ophthalmic 
veins.
Lymph Drainage
The lymph from conjunctiva is drained into preauricular 
lymph nodes.
LACRIMAL APPARATUS (Fig. 3.25)
STRUCTURE
The structures concerned with secretion and drainage of 
lacrimal (tear) fluid together form the lacrimal apparatus
(Fig. 3.25).
The lacrimal apparatus consists of the following 
structures:
1. Lacrimal gland.
2. Ducts of lacrimal gland.
3. Conjunctival sac.
4. Lacrimal puncta.
5. Lacrimal canaliculi.
6. Lacrimal sac.
7. Nasolacrimal duct.
Lacrimal gland: The lacrimal gland is a (J-shaped) serous 
gland. It consists of upper large orbital part and lower small 
palpebral part. The two parts are continuous with each other 
around the lateral margin of the levator palpebrae superio-
ris.
The orbital part is almond shaped and situated in the 
lacrimal fossa in the anterolateral part of the roof of the bony 
orbit.
The palpebral part is one-third of the size of the orbital 
part and is situated in the lateral part of the upper eyelid 
below the levator palpebrae superioris and extends up to the 
superior fornix of conjunctiva.
Ducts of the lacrimal gland: The ducts of lacrimal gland are 
approximately 12 in number, about 4 or 5 from orbital part 
and 6–8 from palpebrae part. They open into the lateral parts 
of the superior fornix of the conjunctival sac.
Lacrimal gland secretes the lacrimal (tear) fluid and its 
ducts convey it to conjunctival sac.
About 1 ml of lacrimal fluid is secreted per day. Half of it 
evaporates and remaining half is drained into lacrimal sac.
Functions of lacrimal fluid
1. Flushes the conjunctiva and keeps the cornea moist.
2. Provides nourishment to cornea.
3. Serves to express emotions—shedding of tears during 
grief and sorrow.
4. Prevents infection (for it contains bactericidal lysozyme).
When lacrimal gland fails to secrete lacrimal fluid as in case 
of Bell’s palsy, the artificial tears are instilled in the eye at 
regular intervals to prevent the cornea from drying and 
desiccation.
Ducts from orbital part traverse the palpebral part to open 
into conjunctival sac. Therefore, removal of palpebral part of 
gland is functionally equivalent to removal of the entire 
lacrimal gland.
Clinical correlation
Accessory lacrimal glands (glands of Krause): These are very 
small serous glands located beneath the palpebral 
conjunctiva near the fornices. They are about 35–40 in the 
upper eyelid and 6–8 in the lower eyelid.
The removal of entire lacrimal gland does not lead to 
dryness of conjunctiva because it is kept moist by the 
secretions of accessory lacrimal glands.
Clinical correlation
Fig. 3.25 Lacrimal apparat us.
Lacrimal
ducts
Levator palpebrae superioris
Lacrimal canaliculus
Nasolacrimal
duct
Inferior meatus
of nose
Lacrimal fold
(valve of Hasner)
Lacrimal punctum
Lacrimal sac
Orbital part of lacrimal gland
Palpebral part of lacrimal gland
Conjunctival
--- Page 80 ---
Scalp, Temple, and Face
Arterial supply: It is by lacrimal branch of ophthalmic artery.
Venous drainage: It is by ophthalmic veins.
Nerve supply of lacrimal gland (Fig. 10.25): The lacrimal 
gland is supplied by parasympathetic (secretomotor), 
sympathetic, and sensory fibres through lacrimal nerves. 
The following nerves supply the lacrimal gland:
1. Parasympathetic (secretomotor) supply of the lacrimal 
gland: The pathway of parasympathetic innervation is as 
follows:
(a) The preganglionic parasympathetic fibres arise from 
lacrimatory nucleus in the pons and pass 
successively through nervus intermedius, geniculate 
ganglion, greater petrosal nerve, nerve of pterygoid 
canal to reach the pterygopalatine ganglion where 
they relay.
(b) The postganglionic fibres arise from the cells of the 
pterygopalatine ganglion and pass successively 
through 
maxillary 
nerve, 
zygomatic 
nerve, 
zygomaticotemporal nerve and lacrimal nerve to 
reach the lacrimal gland.
This parasympathetic pathway is summarized in 
Flowchart 3.1.
2. Sympathetic (vasomotor) supply: The pathway of 
sympathetic innervation is as depicted in Flowchart 3.2.
3. Sensory supply: It is by sensory fibres of lacrimal nerve, 
a branch of ophthalmic division of trigeminal nerve.
Conjunctival sac: It is a potential space between palpebral 
and bulbar conjunctiva.
Lacrimal puncta: These are small openings on the lid 
margins. 
At the junction of these, there is a small conical projection 
called lacrimal papilla surmounted by a tiny aperture called 
lacrimal punctum. The lacrimal papilla faces inwards towards 
the lacus lacrimalis.
Lacrimal canaliculi: There are two lacrimal canaliculi, 
superior and inferior in upper and lower eyelids, 
respectively. Each canaliculus measures about 10 mm in 
length and begins at lacrimal punctum. The superior 
canaliculus at first runs upwards and then bends downwards 
and medially along the free margin of the eyelid to open 
into the lacrimal sac.
The inferior canaliculus at first runs downwards and then 
bends upwards and medially to open into the lacrimal sac. At 
the bending each canaliculus presents a small dilatation 
called ampulla.
N.B.
• Both canaliculi converge medially towards the lacrimal 
sac into which they open separately but sometimes by a 
common dilated stem.
• Canaliculi lie behind the medial palpebral ligament.
• Canaliculi are lined by stratified squamous epithelium 
and contain elastic fibres in their walls, which make them 
dilatable by the probe.
• A few muscle fibres derived from lacrimal part of 
orbicularis oculi are arranged circularly around the base 
of the lacrimal papilla and exert sphincteric action.
Lacrimal sac: It is the upper dilated end of the nasolacrimal 
duct. It is situated in the deep lacrimal groove bound by 
posterior lacrimal crest of lacrimal bone and anterior 
lacrimal crest of frontal process of the maxilla. The sac is 
Flowchart 3.1 Parasympathetic pathway of lacrimal gland.
Lacrimatory nucleus 
Lacrimal nerve to lacrimal gland
Zygomaticotemporal nerve
Zygomatic nerve
Pterygopalatine ganglion (gives origin to
postganglionic parasympathetic fibres)
Greater petrosal nerve 
Geniculate ganglion
Nervus intermedius
Lacrimal nerve to lacrimal gland
Zygomaticotemporal nerve 
Pterygopalatine ganglion
Superior cervical sympathetic ganglion (gives origin
to postganglionic sympathetic fibres)
Deep petrosal nerve 
Zygomatic nerve
Sympathetic plexus around internal carotid artery
T1 spinal segment
Flowchart 3.2 Sympathetic pathway of lacrimal gland.
--- Page 81 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
enclosed in the lacrimal fascia; when distended the lacrimal 
sac is about 15 mm long and 5–6 mm in breadth. It is 
divisible into three parts: fundus, body, and neck from above 
downwards. The narrow neck becomes continuous with 
nasolacrimal duct.
Relations (Fig. 3.26):
Anteriorly: Medial palpebral ligament.
Posteriorly: Lacrimal part of orbicularis oculi (which arises 
from crest of lacrimal bone and from lacrimal 
fascia).
Laterally: 
Lacrimal fascia, which is derived from orbital 
periosteum and minute plexus of veins.
Medially: 
Lacrimal groove and minute arterial plexus.
Nasolacrimal duct: It is a membranous canal, about 18 mm 
long, extending from neck of lacrimal sac to the anterior part 
of inferior meatus of the nose. It is lodged in the bony canal 
formed by maxilla, lacrimal bone, and inferior nasal concha. 
Its lower opening presents an incomplete mucous fold called 
lacrimal fold or valve of Hasner, which prevents the air from 
blowing the duct into the eye when one blasts his nose to 
clean nasal secretions.
Factors Helping the Drainage of Tears
Drainage of tears occurs by following means:
1. Blinking movements of eyelids.
2. Capillary action of the film of the fluid.
3. Contraction of lacrimal part of orbicularis oculi leading 
to distension of lacrimal sac.
DEVELOPMENT OF NASOLACRIMAL 
DUCT AND LACRIMAL SAC
The nasolacrimal duct develops from a solid cellular ecto-
dermal cord, which forms along the nasolacrimal groove, the 
line of fusion of maxillary and lateral nasal processes. Later, 
the cord become submerged beneath the surface ectoderm 
and becomes canalized during the third month to form the 
nasolacrimal duct. The upper end of the duct widens to form 
the lacrimal sac, which develops secondary connection with 
the conjunctival sac by lacrimal canaliculi.
Epiphora: It is an overflow of tears from conjunctival sac 
over the cheeks. It may occur due to:
(a) excessive secretion of tears (hyperlacrimation) follow-
ing intake of spicy food or emotional outbreak, or
(b) obstruction in lacrimal passages, viz. lacrimal punctum, 
lacrimal canaliculi, lacrimal sac and nasolacrimal duct, 
(c) eversion of lower eyelid (ectropion), hence that of 
lacrimal papilla and lacrimal punctum due to laxity of 
orbiculi oculi in old age or loss of its tone due to 
paralysis.
Clinical correlation
Fig. 3.26 Relations of the lacrimal sac.
Medial palpebral
ligament
Posterior
lacrimal crest
Lacrimal bone 
Lacrimal sac
Lacrimal groove 
Frontolacrimal suture
Minute arterial plexus
Frontal process
of maxilla
Anterior lacrimal crest
Lacrimal part of
orbicularis oculi
Lacrimal
fascia
Minute
venous
plexus
--- Page 82 ---
Scalp, Temple, and Face
Golden Facts to Remember
  Most obvious feature of the scalp 
Galea aponeurotica (epicranial aponeurosis)
  Richest cutaneous blood supply in the body
In the region of scalp
  Most important layer of the scalp from clinical 
point of view
Fourth layer (i.e., layer of loose areolar tissue)
  Dangerous layer of the scalp
Layer of loose areolar tissue (4th layer)
  Most common form of birth trauma of the scalp
Caput succedaneum
  Toughest fascia in the body
Temporal fascia
  Sensory supply of whole face is by trigeminal 
nerve except
Skin over the angle of the mandible which is 
supplied by great auricular nerves (C2, C3)
  Chief artery of the face
Facial artery
  Largest vein of the face
Facial vein
  Muscle of the body with largest name
Levator labii superioris alaeque nasi
A 55-year-old school teacher went to his family physi-
cian and complained that since morning he has not been 
able to close his right eye and during eating the food 
accumulates between the teeth and cheek on the right 
side. He is also not able to whistle or puff out his cheek 
properly.
On examination, the physician made the following 
observations:
 The right side of face appeared flattened and 
expressionless.
 Loss of wrinkles on the forehead on the right side.
 Saliva drooled out from the right corner of the mouth.
 When patient smiled, the lower portion of right half 
of the face was pulled to the left side and right corner 
of the face was not raised.
Based on above observation he concluded that all the 
muscles of facial expression on the right side of teacher’s 
face are paralysed and he diagnosed him as a case of 
Bell’s palsy.
Questions
1. What are the characteristic features of muscles of 
facial expression?
2. What is Bell’s palsy? Mention its most common 
cause.
3. What is difference between upper and lower motor 
neuron type of facial palsies?
Answers
1. They are located in the superficial fascia and inserted 
into the skin of the face. All of them are supplied by 
the facial nerve.
2. It is lower motor neuron (LMN) type of facial palsy. 
The exact cause is not known but most probably it 
occurs due to compression of facial nerve in the 
facial canal just above the stylomastoid foramen 
following an inflammation.
3. In lower motor neuron facial palsy whole of the face 
on the side of lesion is paralyzed whereas in upper 
motor neuron facial palsy the upper part of face is 
not affected and only lower half of the face on the 
opposite side is paralyzed.
Clinical Case Study
--- Page 83 ---
Skin, Superficial Fascia, and 
Deep Fascia of the Neck
CHAPTER
The knowledge of skin, superficial fascia, and deep fascia of 
the neck is extremely important. The lines of cleavage in 
skin help to plan the direction of surgical incisions. The 
structures within superficial fascia help in closing the 
surgical incisions and stop profuse bleeding. The deep fascia 
forms fascial compartments and spaces in the neck. It also 
forms fascial planes along which infection can travel from 
one place to the other. The superficial veins in the neck are 
often examined to assess the state of health.
SKIN
The skin in the region of neck is thin and normally under 
tension. The direction of tension lines (also called cleavage 
lines or Langer’s lines) often correspond with the wrinkle lines. 
The cleavage (Langer’s) lines are disposed transversely around 
the neck. Therefore, surgical incisions made along these lines, 
i.e., transverse incisions, in neck heal with invisible scars.
CUTANEOUS INNERVATION (Fig. 4.1)
The cutaneous innervation of the neck is derived from C2, 
C3, and C4 spinal segments.
The 1st cervical (C1) nerve has no cutaneous branch and 
ventral rami of C5–T1 form the brachial plexus to supply the 
upper limb. The skin above the C2 dermatome is supplied by 
trigeminal nerve and the skin below the C4 dermatome is 
supplied by T2 spinal segment (Fig. 4.1).
The skin on the anterolateral aspect of the neck is 
supplied by four cutaneous nerves derived from ventral 
rami of C2, C3, and C4 spinal nerves. The skin on the 
posterior aspect of the neck is supplied by dorsal rami of 
C2, C3, and C4 spinal nerves.
SUPERFICIAL FASCIA
The superficial fascia of the neck consists of a thin layer of 
loose areolar tissue and contains a thin sheet of muscle called 
platysma.
In addition to platysma, it also contains cutaneous nerves, 
superficial veins, superficial lymph nodes, and lymph vessels. 
The cutaneous nerves and veins lie deep to the platysma.
The amount of subcutaneous fat is more in children and 
women than men.
PLATYSMA (Fig. 4.2)
It is a thin quadrilateral broad sheet of muscle in the 
superficial fascia of the side of the neck. It ascends onto the 
face from the front of the neck. Morphologically it represents 
the remnant of panniculus carnosus of animals. It develops 
from the 2nd pharyngeal arch. It covers the anteroinferior 
part of the posterior triangle and superior part of the anterior 
triangle of the neck.
Origin
The platysma arises from skin and deep fascia covering the 
upper parts of the pectoralis major and anterior part of the 
deltoid muscle.
Insertion
After origin, the fibres sweep upwards and forwards 
superficial to the clavicle and sternocleidomastoid. It crosses 
Fig. 4.1 Dermatomes of the head and neck.
C2 &
Trigeminal nerve
--- Page 84 ---
Skin, Superficial Fascia, and Deep Fascia of the Neck
over the lower part of the posterior triangle and upper part 
of the anterior triangle to reach the lower border of the 
mandible, where anterior fibres decussate with the 
corresponding fibres of the opposite side across the midline 
for about 2.5 cm below and behind the symphysis menti 
(Fig. 4.3). Most of the fibres (intermediate and posterior) are 
inserted into the lower border of the body of the mandible. 
Some posterior fibres pass superficial to the angle of the 
mandible and masseter muscle and then turn medially to 
insert into the skin of angle of the mouth through risorius.
Nerve Supply
The platysma is supplied by the cervical branch of the facial 
nerve.
Actions
1. Acting from above, the platysma produces vertical 
ridges in the skin of the neck releasing the pressure of 
skin over the underlying veins and thus helps in the 
venous return. It, therefore, serves to ease the pressure 
of tight collar.
2. Acting from below, it helps to depress the mandible and 
draws the angle of the mouth downwards and laterally 
as in expression of terror/horror.
N.B. Though the risorius appears to be a continuation of 
platysma, it has a different nerve supply, namely, the buccal 
branch of facial nerve.
The surgeons while closing an incision in the neck, suture 
platysma meticulously as a separate layer to prevent adhesion 
of skin and subcutaneous tissue to deeper neck muscles 
because such adhesions cause the overlying skin to move as 
the deeper muscles contract or relax and the wound will heal 
with an ugly scar, which is cosmetically unacceptable.
Since the superficial veins of the neck lie under the cover 
of platysma, the retraction of divided platysma keeps the cut 
veins open. These veins are unable to retract due to their 
attachment to the deep cervical fascia. However, if deep 
fascia is cut, the veins retract and most of the bleeding 
stops.
Clinical correlation
CUTANEOUS NERVES OF THE NECK (Fig. 4.4)
The skin on the back of the neck is supplied segmentally by 
cutaneous nerves, derived from dorsal rami of C2, C3, and 
PLATYSMA
Sternocleidomastoid
Clavicle
Anterior triangle
Posterior
triangle
Masseter
Risorius
Skin of the
angle of the
mouth
Lower border of
mandible
Insertion
Skin and deep fascia covering the upper
part of pectoralis major and anterior part
of deltoid muscle (origin)
Fig. 4.2 Origin and insertion of the platysma.
Fig. 4.3 Decussation of the anterior fibres of platysma. Also 
note the location of anterior jugular veins and jugular 
venous arch.
Anterior border of
sternocleidomastoid
PLATYSMA
Clavicle
Suprasternal notch
Anterior jugular
veins
Jugular venous
arch
Fig. 4.4 Cutaneous nerves of the neck.
Lesser
occipital
nerve (C2)
Third
occipital
nerve (C3)
Greater
occipital
nerve (C2)
Vertex
Lateral Intermediate Medial
Supraclavicular
nerves (C3 and C4)
Transverse
cervical nerve
(C2 and C3)
Great auricular
nerve (C2 and C3)
--- Page 85 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
C4 spinal nerves (Fig. 4.4). The cutaneous nerves of the back 
of the neck are described in Chapter 7.
The skin on the front and side of the neck on each side is 
supplied by four cutaneous nerves derived from ventral rami 
of C2 to C4 spinal nerves through branches of the cervical 
plexus.
They are named as follows:
1. Lesser occipital nerve (C2).
2. Great auricular nerve (C2 and C3).
3. Transverse cervical nerve (C2 and C3).
4. Supraclavicular nerves (C3 and C4).
The course and distribution of these nerves is described in 
Chapter 5.
SUPERFICIAL VEINS OF THE NECK
There are two superficial veins of the neck. These are as 
follows:
1. External jugular vein.
2. Anterior jugular vein.
External jugular vein It begins just below the angle of the 
mandible 
union 
posterior 
division 
retromandibular vein and posterior auricular vein. It then 
runs 
almost 
vertically 
downward 
across 
sternocleidomastoid under the cover of platysma to pierce 
the deep cervical fascia in the anteroinferior angle of the 
posterior triangle about 2.5 cm above the clavicle along the 
posterior border of the sternocleidomastoid and enters the 
supraclavicular space. After passing through this space it 
terminates in the subclavian vein. The external jugular vein 
varies considerably in its size and course. It becomes visible in 
old age particularly when the individual holds his breath or 
blows his cheek with mouth closed, as it impedes the venous 
return to the right side of the heart and distends the vein.
Surface anatomy: The external jugular vein can be marked 
on the surface by a line extending downward and backward 
from angle of the mandible to the middle of the clavicle.
Its tributaries (Fig. 4.5) are as follows:
1. Posterio r auricular vein 
Formative tributaries
2. Retromandibular vein
3. Posterior external jugular vein
4. Oblique jugular vein
5. Transverse cervical vein 
 Terminal tributaries
6. Suprascapular vein
7. Anterior jugular vein
N.B. The posterior auricular vein descends behind the 
auricle to join the posterior division of retromandibular 
vein. Posterior external jugular vein descends along the 
posterior border of sternocleidomastoid to join the 
external jugular vein a little below the midpoint of posterior 
border of the muscle. The oblique jugular vein 
communicates with the internal jugular vein in the upper 
part of the neck. The suprascapular, transverse cervical, 
and anterior jugular veins join the external jugular vein in 
the posterior triangle.
There are two pairs of valves in the lumen of the external 
jugular vein, one at its site of termination into the subclavian 
vein and the other about 4  cm above the clavicle. These 
valves, however, do not prevent regurgitation of blood.
• The wall of the external jugular vein is adherent to deep 
fascia where it pierces the deep fascia (about 2.5  cm 
above the clavicle). Therefore, if external jugular vein is 
cut at this site, its walls cannot collapse. Consequently, air 
is sucked into its lumen due to negative intrathoracic 
pressure during inspiration leading to venous air 
embolism which may cause death subsequently.
• The external jugular vein is occasionally used for central 
venous cannulation, but due to its variable size and 
presence of valves it is often difficult to manipulate the 
cannula through the lower part of the vein. The right 
external jugular vein being in the most direct line with the 
superior vena cava, is the one most commonly used.
• The external jugular vein is often examined by clinicians to 
assess the venous pressure in the right atrium. Normally, 
in recumbent (lying down) position, the lower one-third of 
the vein becomes filled with blood but it collapses on 
reclining at 45° angle. However, if it remains full even 
when the patient reclines at 45° angle, it suggests 
increased right atrial pressure often seen in congestive 
cardiac failure.
Clinical correlation
Fig. 4.5 Superficial veins of the neck.
Oblique jugular vein
Internal jugular
vein
Facial vein
Jugular venous arch
Anterior jugular vein
Superficial
temporal vein
Maxillary vein
Transverse
cervical vein
Posterior external
jugular vein
External jugular
vein
Posterior
auricular vein
Suprascapular
vein
Subclavian vein
Retromandibular
vein
Posterior division of
retromandibular
vein
--- Page 86 ---
Skin, Superficial Fascia, and Deep Fascia of the Neck
Anterior jugular vein It begins below the chin in the 
submental region by the union of small unnamed veins 
from the chin. It descends in the superficial fascia about 
1 cm lateral to the midline. At about 2.5 cm above the 
suprasternal notch, it pierces the investing layer of deep 
cervical fascia to enter the suprasternal space (of Burns),
where it turns sharply laterally and passes deep to 
sternocleidomastoid and terminates in the external jugular 
vein. In the suprasternal space, the anterior jugular vein is 
united across the midline to its fellow of opposite side by a 
transverse venous channel called jugular venous arch.
SUPERFICIAL LYMPH NODES AND 
LYMPH VESSELS
The superficial cervical lymph nodes (Fig. 4.6) are situated 
around the junction of the head with the neck. They drain all 
the superficial structures and some deep structures of the 
head. Most of the efferent lymph vessels from these lymph 
nodes pass to deep cervical lymph nodes arranged along the 
internal jugular vein. A few scattered superficial nodes are 
found along the external and anterior jugular veins. They 
also drain into deep cervical lymph nodes.
The superficial cervical lymph nodes situated around the 
junction of head and neck to form pericervical/cervical collar.
They are arranged into the following groups:
1. Submental nodes.
2. Submandibular nodes.
3. Superficial parotid (preauricular) nodes.
4. Retroauricular nodes.
5. Occipital nodes.
Submental nodes Three or four in number, the submental
nodes lie on mylohyoid muscle below the symphysis menti 
(chin) and receive the lymph from the tip of the tongue, 
lower lip, and chin.
Submandibular nodes The submandibular nodes, about 
half a dozen in number, lie on the surface of the 
submandibular gland and receive the lymph from the face, 
cheek, nose, upper lip, gums, and tongue.
Parotid (preauricular) nodes
The preauricular nodes lie superficial to parotid fascia and 
drain the lymph from the scalp, auricle, eyelids, and cheeks.
Mastoid (postauricular) nodes One or two in number, the 
retroauricular nodes lie on the mastoid process and drain the 
lymph from the scalp and auricle.
Occipital nodes One or two in number, the occipital nodes 
lie on trapezius about 2.5 cm inferolateral to the inion and 
drain the lymph from the scalp. They are notable for being 
palpable in German measles.
These groups form a kind of ring of lymph nodes at the 
junction of the head and neck and may appropriately be 
called necklace of lymph nodes at the craniocervical junc-
tion (Fig. 4.7). The lymph nodes of pericervical collar are 
clinically palpable only when enlarged. 
DEEP CERVICAL FASCIA (FASCIA COLLI)
The deep cervical fascia of the neck (Figs 4.8 and 4.9) is 
clinically very important as it forms various fascial spaces in 
the neck. It also provides capsules to the glands and invests 
the muscles in the region. In addition, it forms protective 
sheaths around neurovascular structures. The layers of deep 
cervical fascia form fascial planes to direct the spread of 
infection or pus in the neck.
The deep cervical fascia of the neck consists of three 
layers. From outside inwards these are as follows:
1. Investing layer of deep cervical fascia.
2. Pretracheal fascia.
3. Prevertebral fascia.
The spaces among the structures of the neck are filled 
with loose areolar tissue. The structures of the neck are 
mostly destined to move up and down. The layers of deep 
cervical fascia are no more than the laminar condensation of 
Fig. 4.6 Superficial cervical lymph nodes.
Retroauricular
(mastoid)
Occipital
Lymph nodes
along the external
jugular vein
External
jugular vein
Preauricular
(superficial
parotid)
Submandibular
Submental
Anterior
jugular vein
Lymph nodes
along the
anterior
jugular vein
Fig. 4.7 Ring of superficial cervical lymph nodes at the 
junction of the head and neck.
Submandibular
Occipital
Retroauricular
Preauricular
Submandibular
Submental
Occipital
Retroauricular
Preauricular
--- Page 87 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
These laminae ensheath muscles and other moving 
structures. This permits movement between the sheaths and 
movements of structures within them.
Investing fascia This layer encircles the neck like a collar, 
deep to platysma and superficial fascia. In doing so it encloses 
the sternocleidomastoid and trapezius—the two large 
superficial muscles on either side of the neck.
Attachments
Superiorly it is attached to external occipital protuberance, 
superior nuchal line, mastoid process, and lower border 
of mandible from behind forwards.
2. Inferiorly it is attached to the spine of scapula, acromion 
process, upper aspect of clavicle, and jugular notch of 
manubrium sterni from behind forwards.
3. Anteriorly across the midline, it becomes continuous 
with its counter part of the other side. In the anterior 
midline it is attached to symphysis menti, hyoid bone 
jugular notch from above downwards.
4. Posteriorly it is attached to ligamentum nuchae and 
spine of 7th cervical vertebra.
Tracing of the investing layer
Vertical tracing: When traced upwards above the hyoid bone, 
it splits to enclose the submandibular salivary gland 
(Fig. 4.10). The superficial layer covers the superficial surface 
of the gland and it is attached to the lower border of the body 
of the mandible. The deep layer covers the medial surface of 
the gland and is attached to the mylohyoid line of the mandi-
ble. Posterior to the submandibular gland, at the lower pole of 
the parotid gland, it splits to enclose this gland also (Fig. 4.10).
Fig. 4.8 Vertical extent (disposition) of the three layers of 
the deep cervical fascia. Buccopharyngeal fascia is also 
shown. Note the continuity of fascial spaces of the neck into 
the mediastinum.
Fig. 4.9 Diagrammatic transverse section through neck at the level of the 6th cervical vertebra to show the horizontal 
disposition of the three layers of deep cervical fascia.
Fibrous pericardium
Isthmus of
thyroid gland
Manubrium
sterni
Pretracheal
fascia
Investing layer
Thyroid cartilage
Cricoid cartilage
Hyoid bone
External occipital
protuberance
Ligamentum
nuchae
Investing layer of
deep cervical fascia
Prevertebral
fascia
Buccopharyngeal
fascia
Spine of C7
Trachea
Esophagus
Ligamentum nuchae
Roots of cervical
spinal nerve
Roots of
ansa cervicalis
Omohyoid
superior belly
Sternothyroid
Sternohyoid
Investing layer
Pretracheal layer
Trachea
Recurrent laryngeal nerve
Sternocleidomastoid
Carotid sheath
Sympathetic trunk
Prevertebral layer
Scalenus anterior
Scalenus medius
Levator scapulae
Splenius capitis
Trapezius
loose areolar tissue produced by the movements of these 
structures.
These laminar condensations take different names in 
different regions and are continuous with each other either 
directly or indirectly through loose areolar tissue.
The loose areolar tissue forms fascial sheets or laminae in 
the same way as unwoven cotton forms sheets of cloth after 
spinning.
--- Page 88 ---
Skin, Superficial Fascia, and Deep Fascia of the Neck
The superficial layer is strong and covers the superficial 
surface of the parotid gland as parotidomasseteric fascia
to get attached to the lower border of the zygomatic arch. 
The deeper layer passes deep to the parotid gland to get 
attached to the lower border of the tympanic plate and 
styloid process of the temporal bone. The part of this layer 
stretching between the styloid process and the angle of 
mandible condenses to form the stylomandibular ligament
which separates the parotid gland from submandibular 
gland.
When traced downwards, the fascia splits twice to enclose 
two spaces:
Above the suprasternal notch, it splits into two layers to 
enclose suprasternal space (of Burns) before being attached 
to the anterior and posterior borders of the suprasternal 
notch.
The suprasternal space contains:
(a) sternal heads of sternocleidomastoid muscles,
(b) jugular venous arch,
(c) interclavicular ligament, and
(d) lymph node (sometimes).
Above the middle third of clavicle, it splits into two layers 
to enclose the supraclavicular space (Fig. 4.11). The anterior 
and posterior layers get attached to the anterior and 
posterior borders of the upper surface of the clavicle. The 
posterior layer encloses the inferior belly of omohyoid and 
after being attached to clavicle it becomes continuous with 
the posterior layer of clavipectoral fascia.
The supraclavicular space contains:
(a) terminal part of the external jugular vein, and
(b) supraclavicular nerves before they become cutaneous.
The investing layer also forms fascial pulleys to anchor the 
tendons of the digastric and omohyoid muscles.
Horizontal tracing: When traced forwards from its 
attachment to ligament nuchae, it first splits to enclose the 
trapezius, then forms the roof of the posterior triangle, then 
again splits to enclose the sternocleidomastoid, and finally 
forms the roof of the anterior triangle.
N.B. ‘Rule of 2’. When summed up, it is noted that invest-
ing layer of deep cervical fascia presents everything in ‘2’, 
for example it
• encloses 2 muscles, trapezius and sternocleidomastoid.
• forms roofs of 2 triangles, anterior and posterior triangles.
• splits to enclose 2 glands, submandibular and parotid.
• splits to enclose 2 spaces, suprasternal and supraclavicular.
• forms 2 fascial slings (pulleys) for inferior belly of 
omohyoid and intermediate tendon of digastric muscle.
Pretracheal fascia This layer of deep cervical fascia covers 
the front and sides of trachea, hence its name—pretracheal 
fascia. It splits to enclose the thyroid gland forming its 
capsule and is attached to the oblique line of thyroid cartilage 
Fig. 4.10 Investing layer of the deep cervical fascia enclosing two glands: A, parotid gland; B, submandibular gland.
Deep layer
Stylomandibular
ligament
Tympanic plate
External acoustics
meatus
Parotid gland
Zygomatic arch
Superficial layer
(parotidomasseteric
fascia)
Investing layer of
deep cervical fascia
Hyoid bone
Deep layer
Body of
mandible
Superficial
layer
Submandibular
gland
Fig. 4.11 Investing layer of the deep cervical fascia 
enclosing supraclavicular space.
Pectoralis
major
Clavicle
Platysma
Supraclavicular
space
External jugular vein
Investing layer of
deep cervical fascia
Supraclavicular
nerve
Inferior belly of
omohyoid
Subclavian vein
Subclavius muscle
Clavipectoral fascia
--- Page 89 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
and to the arch of cricoid cartilage anteriorly. A fibrous band 
called ligament of Berry is derived from this fascia and 
connects the capsule of the lateral lobe of the thyroid gland 
to the cricoid cartilage (Fig. 4.12).
Tracing of the pretracheal fascia
Horizontal tracing: When traced horizontally, it merges with 
the investing layer of deep cervical fascia enclosing the 
sternocleidomastoid and the anterior wall of the carotid 
sheath.
Vertical tracing: When traced above, it is attached to the 
hyoid bone and when traced below, it enters the thorax in 
front of the trachea and blends with the apex of the fibrous 
pericardium.
• The attachment of pretracheal fascia to hyoid bone and 
thyroid and cricoid cartilages allows the thyroid gland to 
move up and down with the larynx during swallowing.
• The layers of pretracheal fascia which cover the posterior 
surface of the thyroid lobe is ill defined. As a result, 
enlarged thyroid (goitre) easily bulges posteriorly to 
compress the esophagus causing dysphagia.
• The pretracheal fascia provides a slippery surface to allow 
free movements of trachea during swallowing.
Clinical correlation
Prevertebral fascia It is extremely strong and lies in front of 
the prevertebral muscles.
Tracing of the prevertebral fascia
Horizontal tracing: When traced laterally, it covers the 
scalene muscles, levator scapulae, and splenius capitis 
forming the fascial carpet of the posterior triangle. The roots 
of cervical spinal nerves that form the cervical and brachial 
plexuses lie deep to it.
As the trunks of brachial plexus and subclavian artery 
emerge between the scalenus anterior and scalenus medius 
and move towards the axilla, they carry with them a tubular 
sheath of this fascia, called axillary sheath, which may extend 
up to the elbow.
N.B. The subclavian and axillary veins lie outside the sheath 
to allow their free dilation during increased venous return 
from the upper limb.
Vertical tracing: Traced above, the fascia extends up to the 
base of the skull to which it is attached. Traced below, it 
continues downwards in front of longus colli muscles into 
the superior mediastinum where it blends with the anterior 
longitudinal ligament of the upper thoracic vertebrae 
(T1 to T3).
Other features
Anteriorly, the prevertebral layer of deep cervical fascia is 
separated from posterior aspect of the pharynx and its 
covering, buccopharyngeal fascia, by a potential space called 
retropharyngeal space (Fig. 4.13). This space allows the 
expansion of the pharynx during swallowing. The 
retropharyngeal space is continuous with the parapharyngeal 
spaces at the sides of the pharynx. The retropharyngeal space 
is divided into two lateral compartments (spaces of Gillette)
by a midline fibrous raphe. Each lateral space contains 
retropharyngeal lymph nodes, which usually disappear at 
3–4 years of age.
The space behind the prevertebral fascia and in front of 
the vertebral bodies is called prevertebral space.
Tracheal rings
Hyoid bone
Capsule (false)
of thyroid gland
Thyroid gland
Fibrous pericardium
Thyroid cartilage
Cricoid cartilage
Ligament of Berry
Fig. 4.12 Vertical disposition of pretracheal fascia enclosing 
thyroid gland.
Fig. 4.13 Retropharyngeal space.
Posterior pharyngeal
wall
Pharynx
Midline fusion between
prevertebral fascia and 
buccopharyngeal fascia
Prevertebral
fascia 
Retropharyngeal
lymph nodes
Buccopharyngeal
fascia
Retropharyngeal
space
--- Page 90 ---
Skin, Superficial Fascia, and Deep Fascia of the Neck
• The infections of retropharyngeal space can pass down 
behind the esophagus and may extend into the posterior 
mediastinum, of course, through superior mediastinum.
• The retropharyngeal abscess due to involvement of 
retropharyngeal lymph nodes produces paramedian 
unilateral bulge in the posterior pharyngeal wall due to 
fusion of buccopharyngeal fascia to the prevertebral 
fascia in the median plane.
• Tubercular caries of cervical vertebra produce abscess in 
the prevertebral space which often extends into the 
retropharyngeal space.
• Pus collected in the prevertebral space due to caries of 
cervical vertebrae may travel forward and cause midline 
bulge in the posterior pharyngeal wall. Pus may travel 
laterally first into the posterior triangle deep to fascial 
carpet formed by prevertebral fascia and then along the 
axillary sheath into the axilla or even into the arm.
Clinical correlation
Other Derivatives of the Deep Cervical Fascia
These include:
1. Carotid sheath.
2. Buccopharyngeal fascia.
Carotid sheath It is a tubular condensation of deep cervical 
fascia around the (a) common carotid and internal carotid 
arteries, and (b) internal jugular vein and vagus nerve 
(Fig. 4.14). The vagus nerve lies posteriorly between the vein 
and arteries. The carotid sheath is wedged between the three 
layers of the deep cervical fascia, i.e., investing layer, 
pretracheal fascia, and prevertebral fascia, and attached to all 
these layers by loose areolar tissue. The sheath is thick around 
common and internal carotid arteries but thin over the 
internal jugular vein in order to allow its expansion during 
increased venous return.
Carotid sheath extends from the base of the skull above to 
the arch of aorta below. At the base of the skull, it is attached 
to the margins of the carotid canal and jugular fossa. At the 
arch of aorta, it blends with its tunica adventitia.
Relations
1. The ansa cervicalis is embedded in the anterior wall of 
the carotid sheath.
2. The cervical sympathetic chain is closely related to 
posterior wall of the sheath, plastered to the prevertebral 
fascia.
The malignant and tuberculous deep cervical lymph nodes 
frequently become adherent to the internal jugular vein. 
Therefore, during block dissection of the neck, the sheath is 
exposed and a portion of the vessel is resected to facilitate 
removal of these lymph nodes.
Clinical correlation
Buccopharyngeal fascia It is a delicate and distensible layer 
of fascia that covers the constrictor muscles of pharynx and 
buccinator muscle. The buccopharyngeal fascia extends from 
the base of the skull to the esophagus.
N.B. Together with similar layer of fascia on the internal 
surfaces of the constrictor muscles, the pharyngobasilar 
fascia closes the gaps in the muscular wall of the pharynx.
Fig. 4.14 Carotid sheath: A, surface view; B, sectional view.
Internal
jugular vein
Carotid sheath
Vagus nerve
Internal
carotid artery
Common
carotid artery
External
carotid artery
Ansa cervicalis
Common carotid
artery
Sympathetic chain
Carotid sheath
Prevertebral fascia
Vagus nerve
Internal
jugular vein
--- Page 91 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
A 27-year-old individual reported to the emergency 
OPD. He had linear cut on the anterolateral aspect of 
his neck which was bleeding profusely. On examination 
the doctors found that the wound was superficial and 
not involving any major structure that could threaten 
his life. The wound was located in the upper part of the 
carotid triangle. It was cleaned and stitched. The boy 
was discharged and given a course of antibiotics. He 
was asked to come for removal of stitches after 7 days. 
After removal of stitches a wide ugly scar was seen on 
the side of the cut.
Questions
1. Enumerate the structures present in the superficial 
fascia of the neck (anterolateral aspect).
2. Why do superficial cut-wounds in the region of 
neck bleed profusely?
3. What likely mistake the doctor could have made 
during stitching that resulted in wide ugly scar?
Answers
1. Platysma, superficial veins, cutaneous nerves, 
superficial lymph nodes, and lymph vessels.
2. The superficial cut wounds of the neck bleed 
profusely because retraction of divided platysma 
keeps the cut superficial veins open.
3. He may not have sutured the platysma as a separate 
layer; for details refer to clinical correlation on page 
Clinical Case Study
Golden Facts to Remember
  Most important superficial vein in the neck
External jugular vein
  Most commonly used external jugular vein for 
central venous cannulation/catheterization
Right external jugular vein
  Muscle of the neck representing panniculus 
carnosus of lower animals
Platysma
  Cold abscess (tubercular abscess)
Abscess without signs of acute inflammation like 
pain and redness
  Commonest cause of cold abscess in the neck
Tuberculosis of cervical vertebrae (caries of cervical 
vertebrae)
  Ligament of Berry
Fibrous band connecting thyroid capsule to the 
cricoid cartilage
  Muscle in the neck, which serves to ease the tight 
collar
Platysma
--- Page 92 ---
Side of the Neck
CHAPTER
The side of the neck is roughly quadrangular in shape. It is 
bounded anteriorly by anterior midline of the neck, 
posteriorly by anterior border of the trapezius, superiorly by 
the lower border of the body of the mandible and a line 
extending from the angle of the mandible to the mastoid 
process, and inferiorly by the clavicle.
The side of the neck is the common site for various 
pathological lesions, such as lymphadenopathy, cysts, 
tumors, etc. It is also a frequent site for performing various 
clinical procedures such as biopsy, venepuncture, nerve 
block, etc. 
Surface Landmarks on the Side of the Neck (Fig. 5.1)
1. Sternocleidomastoid 
forms 
most 
important 
landmark on the side of the neck. It becomes prominent 
when the face is turned to the opposite side and is seen 
as a raised ridge extending obliquely from the sternum 
to the mastoid process.
2. Mastoid process is a large bony projection easily felt 
behind the lower part of the auricle.
3. Anterior border of trapezius becomes prominent when 
shoulder is elevated against the resistance.
4. Lesser supraclavicular fossa is a small triangular 
depression above the medial end of the clavicle between 
the sternal and clavicular heads of sternocleidomastoid. 
It overlies the internal jugular vein.
5. Greater supraclavicular fossa is a depression above the 
middle one-third of the clavicle. It overlies the cervical 
part of brachial plexus and the third part of the 
subclavian artery.
6. Transverse process of first cervical vertebra can be felt 
on deep pressure midway between the angle of the 
mandible and mastoid process. It is crossed by spinal 
accessory nerve.
7. Lower border of the mandible can be easily felt by 
running a finger backwards from chin to the angle of the 
mandible.
8. Clavicle being subcutaneous can be palpated along its 
entire extent at the junction of the neck and chest.
Skin, Superficial Fascia, and Deep Fascia
The skin, superficial fascia, and deep fascia on the side of 
neck is described in Chapter 4.
TRIANGLES ON THE SIDE OF THE NECK
The side of the neck is quadrangular in shape (vide supra). 
This quadrilateral area is divided into large anterior and 
posterior triangles by the sternocleidomastoid muscle which 
runs across this area diagonally from mastoid process to the 
upper end of the sternum (Fig. 5.2).
The students should first know the attachments of two 
major superficial muscles, i.e., sternocleidomastoid and 
trapezius, encountered on the side of neck before studying 
the anterior and posterior triangles. The trapezius is 
described in Chapter 7 on page 98, while sternocleidomastoid 
is described in the following text.
Fig. 5.1 Surface landmarks on the side of the neck.
Lesser supra
clavicular fossa
Laryngeal
prominence
Sternocleido-
mastoid
Mastoid process
Transverse
process of atlas
Anterior border of
trapezius
Greater
supraclavicular fossa
Clavicle
Lower border of 
mandible
--- Page 93 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
Sternocleidomastoid Muscle (Fig. 5.3)
It is the key muscle of the neck which extends obliquely 
across the side of the neck, dividing it into posterior and 
anterior triangles.
Origin
The muscle arises by two heads: sternal and clavicular.
1. Sternal head, is tendinous and arises by a rounded 
tendon from the superolateral part of the front of the 
manubrium sterni, below the suprasternal notch and 
passes upwards, backwards, and laterally in front of the 
sternoclavicular joint.
2. Clavicular head, is flat and musculoaponeurotic. It 
arises from the medial third of the superior surface of 
the clavicle. It passes vertically upwards deep to the 
sternal head with which it unites to form a fusiform 
belly.
N.B. A small triangular gap exists between the two heads 
above the sternoclavicular joint. It is called lesser supraclavicular 
fossa. It contains the terminal part of the internal jugular vein, 
which can be entered at this site by a needle or catheter.
Insertion
The muscle is inserted by (a) a thick tendon on the lateral 
surface of the mastoid process extending from its tip to its 
base, and (b) by a thin aponeurosis into the lateral half of the 
superior nuchal line of the occipital bone.
Arterial Supply
The sternocleidomastoid is supplied by branches of 
following arteries:
1. Upper part, by occipital and posterior auricular arteries.
2. Middle part, by superior thyroid artery.
3. Lower part, by suprascapular artery.
N.B. The knowledge of arterial supply is important to make 
muscle flap in reconstructive surgery.
Nerve Supply
The sternocleidomastoid muscle is supplied by the spinal 
accessory nerve. It is also supplied by the ventral rami of C2 
Fig. 5.2 Boundaries and triangles on the side of the neck. The quadrilateral shape of the side of the neck can be well 
appreciated by Figure in the inset.
Clavicle
Posterior
triangle
Anterior midline of
the neck
Sternocleidomastoid
muscle
Anterior
triangle
Lower border of mandible
Line extending from angle of
mandible to mastoid process
Superior nuchal line
Anterior border of
trapezius muscle
Mastoid
process
Post.
Ant.
Superior
nuchal line
Clavicular
head
Clavicle
Sternal head
STERNOCLEIDOMASTOID
Manubrium
sterni
Fig. 5.3 Origin and insertion of the sternocleidomastoid 
muscle.
--- Page 94 ---
Side of the Neck
and C3, which are mostly sensory and carry proprioceptive 
sensations from the muscle.
Actions
When muscle contracts, it tilts the head towards the shoulder 
on the same side and rotates the head so that chin turns to 
the opposite side (Fig. 5.4A). This movement occurs during 
an upward sideways glance. 
When muscles of both sides contract together they draw 
the head forwards as in lifting the head from the pillow or 
bending the head during eating food (Fig. 5.4B). If the head 
is fixed by prevertebral muscles, the two sternocleidomastoid 
muscles act as accessory muscles of respiration during forced 
inspiration.
Relations
The sternocleidomastoid is enclosed in the investing layer of 
deep cervical fascia. It is pierced by the spinal accessory nerve 
and 4 sternomastoid arteries. Its superficial and deep rela-
tions are as under:
Superficial Relations
 Skin
 Platysma
 Three cutaneous nerves
(a) Great auricular
(b) Transverse cervical
(c) Medial supraclavicular
(d) Lesser occipital
 External jugular vein
 Superficial cervical lymph nodes
 Parotid gland
Deep Relations
 In the upper part
(a) Muscle: Posterior belly of digastric, longissimus 
capitis, and splenius capitis
(b) Artery: Occipital artery
 In the middle part
(a) Muscles: Levator scapulae, scalenus anterior, scalenus 
medius, scalenus posterior, splenius capitis, inferior 
belly of omohyoid
(b) Arteries: Common carotid, internal carotid
(c) Veins: Internal jugular, anterior jugular
(d) Nerves: Vagus, spinal accessory, cervical plexus, 
brachial plexus (upper part), ansa cervicalis (inferior 
root)
(e) Glands: Thyroid gland, lymph nodes
 In the lower part
(a) Muscles: 
Sternohyoid, 
sternothyroid, 
scalenus 
anterior
(b) Arteries: Suprascapular, transverse cervical
(c) Veins: Anterior jugular
(d) Nerves: Brachial plexus (lower part), phrenic nerve
• Torticollis or wry neck: It is a clinical condition in which 
head is bent to one side and chin points to the opposite 
side. This occurs due to spasm of sternocleidomastoid 
and trapezius muscles supplied by spinal accessory 
nerve.
– The spasmodic torticollis is characterized by repeated 
painful 
contractions 
trapezius 
sternocleidomastoid muscles on one side. It is usually 
caused by exposure to cold and maladjustment of 
pillow during sleep.
– The refl ex torticollis occurs due to irritation of spinal 
accessory nerve caused by inflamed or suppurating 
lymph nodes.
– The congenital torticollis occurs due to birth injury to 
muscle. Permanent torticollis may occur due to subse-
quent ischemic contracture.
• Sternomastoid tumor: It is the swelling in the middle 
third of the sternocleidomastoid muscle due to edema and 
ischemic necrosis caused by birth trauma.
Clinical correlation
N.B. The sternocleidomastoid is crossed superficially by the 
great auricular nerve, external jugular vein, and transverse 
cervical nerve, in that order from above downwards. On the 
deeper aspect, it is also related to deep cervical lymph 
nodes.
POSTERIOR TRIANGLE
It is the triangular space on the side of neck behind the 
sternocleidomastoid muscle. Its apex is directed upwards 
and backwards towards the mastoid process and base 
downwards towards the clavicle.
Fig. 5.4 Actions of the sternocleidomastoid muscle: 
A, when acting alone; B, when acting together.
--- Page 95 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
Boundaries (Fig. 5.6)
Anterior: 
 Posterior border of sternocleidomastoid 
muscle.
Posterior: 
Anterior border of trapezius muscle.
Inferior (base): 
 Superior aspect of middle third of the 
clavicle.
Superior (apex): Meeting point of sternocleidomastoid and 
trapezius muscles at the superior nuchal 
line of the occipital bone. 
Roof
It is formed by the investing layer of the deep cervical fascia, 
stretching between the sternocleidomastoid and trapezius 
muscles.
superficial fascia overlying the roof contains 
platysma, external jugular and posterior jugular veins, and 
cutaneous nerves and vessels.
Structures piercing the roof of the posterior triangle 
(Fig. 5.5) are:
1. Four cutaneous branches of cervical plexus, viz.
(a) Lesser occipital nerve (C2)
(b) Great auricular nerve (C2, C3)
(c) Transverse cervical nerve (C2, C3)
(d) Supraclavicular nerves (C3, C4).
 
They pierce the roof near the middle of the posterior 
border of the sternocleidomastoid muscle (for details 
see page 83).
2. External jugular vein: It begins just below the angle of 
mandible, runs downwards and backwards crossing the 
sternocleidomastoid obliquely and under the cover of 
platysma (for details see page 70).
Floor (Fig. 5.6)
The floor of posterior triangle is muscular and is formed 
from above downwards by the following muscles:
1. Semispinalis capitis.
2. Splenius capitis.
3. Levator scapulae.
4. Scalenus medius.
5. First digitation of serratus anterior (sometimes).
Fascial carpet of the posterior triangle
The muscular floor of posterior triangle is covered by 
prevertebral layer of deep cervical fascia, which forms the 
fascial carpet of the floor of the posterior triangle. It forms 
axillary sheath around subclavian artery and brachial plexus 
travelling from the root of the neck to the upper limb.
The lower part of the posterior triangle is crossed by 
inferior belly of omohyoid superficial to the fascial carpet.
Pus collected in the posterior triangle deep to its fascial 
carpet from tubercular cervical vertebrae may track 
downwards and laterally along the axillary sheath to first 
appear in the axilla or even in the arm subsequently.
Clinical correlation
Subdivisions (Fig. 5.7)
The posterior triangle is subdivided into two parts by the 
inferior belly of the omohyoid, which crosses the lower part 
of the triangle obliquely upwards and forwards (a) a larger 
upper part called occipital triangle, and (b) a small lower 
part called subclavian (supraclavicular) triangle. These parts 
are so named because they contain occipital and subclavian 
arteries, respectively.
Fig. 5.5 Structures piercing the roof of the posterior 
triangle.
Supraclavicular nerves
(C3, C4)
Internal
jugular vein
External
jugular vein
Transverse
cervical nerve
(C2, C3)
Roof
(investing layer of 
deep cervical fascia)
Lesser occipital
nerve (C2)
Great auricular
nerve (C2, C3)
Trapezius
Sternocleidomastoid
Scalenus medius
Semispinalis capitis
Splenius capitis
Superior nuchal line
Mastoid
process
Levator scapulae
Muscles forming the floor
Fig. 5.6 Boundaries and floor of the posterior triangle.
--- Page 96 ---
Side of the Neck
Occipital artery
Great auricular nerve
Transverse
cervical nerve
Supraclavicular nerves
Lymph nodes
Spinal
accessory nerve
Subclavian
artery
Subclavian vein
Lesser occipital nerve
Upper trunk
Middle trunk
Brachial
plexus
Lower trunk
Inferior belly of
omohyoid
Fig. 5.7 Subdivisions and main contents of the posterior triangle.
Fig. 5.8 Schematic diagram showing the floor and contents of the right posterior triangle.
Subclavian vein
Subclavian artery
External jugular vein
Transverse cervical vein
Dorsal scapular nerve
Supraclavicular nerve
Transverse cervical nerve
Great auricular nerve
Lesser occipital nerve
Semispinalis capitis
Anterior border of trapezius
Splenius capitis
Levator scapulae
Spinal accessory nerve
Transverse cervical artery
Inferior belly of
omohyoid
Suprascapular nerve
Trunks of brachial plexus
Nerve to subclavius
Suprascapular artery
Supraclavicular
lymph nodes
Superficial branch of
transverse cervical artery
Lymph nodes
along the spinal
accessory nerve
Occipital lymph nodes
Occipital artery
Posterior border of
sternocleidomastoid
--- Page 97 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
The spinal accessory nerve may be damaged in operations 
involving the removal or biopsy of lymph nodes in the 
posterior triangle of the neck.
Clinical correlation
 Four cutaneous branches of cervical plexus (Fig. 5.10): 
Although cervical plexus is located deep to the 
sternocleidomastoid but its cutaneous branches emerge at 
the midpoint or just above the midpoint of the posterior 
border of the sternocleidomastoid by piercing the deep 
cervical fascia.
Lymph nodes 
Spinal accessory nerve
Transverse 
process of atlas 
Sternocleidomastoid 
Fig. 5.9 Course of spinal accessory nerve right through 
sternocleidomastoid muscle. Note the relation of lymph 
nodes to this nerve.
Contents (Figs 5.7 and 5.8)
1. In the occipital triangle (i.e., above the omohyoid)
(a) Spinal accessory nerve
(b) 3rd and 4th cervical nerves providing branches to 
levator scapulae and trapezius muscles
(c) Dorsal scapular nerve (C5)
(d) Four cutaneous branches of cervical plexus (initial 
parts)
(e) Superficial transverse cervical artery
(f) Occipital artery.
2. In the subclavian/supraclavicular triangle (i.e., below 
the omohyoid)
(a) 3rd part of the subclavian artery
(b) Subclavian vein
(c) Terminal part of external jugular vein
(d) Trunks of brachial plexus
(e) Superficial (transverse) cervical, suprascapular, and 
dorsal scapular arteries
(f) Lymph nodes.
N.B.
• The most important contents of posterior triangle are: 
(a) third part of subclavian artery, (b) brachial plexus 
(cervical part), (c) spinal accessory nerve, and (d) lymph 
nodes.
• All the important contents of the posterior triangle lie 
deep to the fascial carpet of the floor except spinal 
accessory nerve, which lies just underneath the roof. In 
operations on the posterior triangle all the structures 
except spinal accessory nerve are safe, provided fascial 
carpet of posterior triangle is left intact.
Relevant Features of Some of the Contents
 Spinal accessory nerve: This nerve emerges in the 
posterior triangle by piercing the posterior border of the 
sternocleidomastoid (a little above the middle of this 
border). In this situation, it is related to lymph nodes of 
the upper deep cervical chain (Fig. 5.9). The nerve then 
crosses the posterior triangle by running downwards 
and laterally over and parallel to the fibres of levator 
scapulae muscle to disappear underneath to the anterior 
border of trapezius (about 5–6 cm above the clavicle) 
and supplies trapezius muscle. In the posterior triangle 
it is adherent to the deep aspect of the fascial roof of this 
triangle.
N.B. More proximally, the nerve lies in front of transverse 
process of atlas vertebra runs downwards and laterally to 
enter the anterior border of sternocleidomastoid muscle 
between its upper two quarters and supplies it. 
Fig. 5.10 Cutaneous branches of the cervical plexus. Note 
the location of ‘nerve point of the neck’ (dotted red circle).
Lesser occipital nerve
Great auricular nerve
Spinal accessory nerve
Transverse 
cervical
nerve
Nerve point of
neck
Supraclavicular nerve
--- Page 98 ---
Side of the Neck
The course and distribution of these cutaneous nerves 
are as follows:
(a) The lesser occipital nerve hooks around the spinal 
accessory nerve and ascends for a short distance along 
the posterior border of sternocleidomastoid to inner-
vate the skin of the upper one-third of the cranial 
surface of the auricle and that of the head behind the 
auricle.
(b) The great auricular nerve runs forwards and upwards 
across the sternocleidomastoid towards the angle of 
mandible where it divides into anterior and posterior 
branches. It first supplies the skin of the face over the 
angle of the mandible and then the skin over the 
mastoid region and lower part of both the surfaces of 
the auricle.
(c) The transverse cervical nerve passes forward across 
the sternocleidomastoid deep to the external jugular 
vein and then divides into ascending and descending 
branches to supply the skin of the front of the neck.
(d) The supraclavicular nerve arises as a common trunk 
which descends downwards and divides into medial, 
intermediate, and lateral supraclavicular nerves.
 
(i) The medial supraclavicular nerve crosses in 
front of the medial one-third of the clavicle to 
supply the skin on the chest up to the 2nd rib.
 
(ii) The intermediate supraclavicular nerve passes 
in front of the middle third of the clavicle to 
supply the skin on the front of the chest. 
Occasionally it pierces the clavicle through and 
through.
 
(iii) The lateral supraclavicular nerve crosses in 
front of the lateral third of the clavicle and sup-
plies the skin over the shoulder and the upper 
half of the deltoid muscle.
N.B. The point at the junction of the upper and middle third 
of the posterior border of sternocleidomastoid where four 
cutaneous nerves and spinal accessory nerve emerge is 
termed nerve point of the neck.
In ‘cervical plexus nerve block’ the anesthetic agent is 
injected at this site.
 Muscular branches to levator scapulae and trapezius 
(C3, C4): They appear at about the middle of 
sternocleidomastoid. The branches going to levator 
scapulae soon end in it, whereas those going to trapezius 
run below and parallel to the spinal accessory nerve and 
cross the middle of the triangle.
 Nerve to rhomboids: It pierces scalenus medius muscle 
and immediately passes deep to levator scapulae muscle.
 Cervical part of the brachial plexus: The roots and trunks 
of brachial plexus lie in the neck. 
Four branches arise from cervical part of brachial 
plexus—two from roots and two from trunks (Fig. 5.11 ).
From roots
(a) Dorsal scapular nerve arises from C5 root. It pierces the 
scalenus medius and runs laterally across it to pass deep 
to levator scapulae, which it supplies.
(b) Long thoracic nerve (or nerve to serratus anterior)
arises from C5, C6, and C7 roots. It passes downwards 
behind the brachial plexus and third part of the 
subclavian artery. It crosses the first rib to supply the 
serratus anterior muscle.
Remember that C5 and C6 roots pierce the scalenus 
medius and C7 root joins the nerve at the lower level in 
the axilla.
From trunks
(a) Nerve to subclavius arises from upper trunk (C5 and 
C6). It passes downwards in front of brachial plexus and 
subclavian vessels to supply the subclavius muscle.
(b) Suprascapular nerve also arises from the upper trunk 
(C5 and C6). It passes laterally deep to inferior belly of 
omohyoid and trapezius to enter the supraspinous fossa 
through suprascapular notch to supply the supraspinous 
and infraspinatus muscles.
 Transverse cervical artery: It is a branch of thyrocervical 
trunk of the first part of subclavian artery. It passes 
laterally and upwards crossing the scalenus anterior, 
upper trunk of brachial plexus and scalenus medius. 
Fig. 5.11 Branches arising from cervical part (roots of 
trunks) of brachial plexus (SS = suprascapular nerve, NS = 
nerve to subclavius).
Long thoracic
nerve
Lower
Middle
Upper 
CORDS
DIVISIONS
TRUNKS 
ROOTS 
Dorsal
scapular nerve
--- Page 99 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
At the lower border of levator scapulae, it divides into the 
superficial and deep branches.
 Suprascapular artery: This is also a branch of 
thyrocervical trunk. It passes laterally and backwards 
behind the clavicle to reach the upper border of the 
scapula.
 Dorsal scapular artery: It arises from the third part of the 
subclavian artery. It passes laterally in front of scalenus 
medius and through the brachial plexus to reach the 
superior angle of the scapula.
 Occipital artery: It is a branch of external carotid artery. It 
crosses the apex of the triangle superficial to the 
semispinalis capitis.
 Subclavian artery: It passes behind the scalenus anterior 
over the first rib. It is closely related to the lower trunk of 
the brachial plexus.
 Subclavian vein: It passes in front of scalenus anterior 
over the first rib.
 Terminal part of external jugular vein: It pierces the 
fascial roof of the posterior triangle about 2.5 cm above 
the clavicle to terminate in the subclavian vein (for details 
see Chapter 4, p. 70).
 Lymph nodes: These are deep cervical lymph nodes found 
at the following sites in the posterior triangle:
(a) A chain of nodes along the posterior border of 
sternocleidomastoid.
(b) A chain of nodes along the spinal accessory nerve.
(c) A few nodes in the apical region of the triangle called 
occipital lymph nodes.
(d) A group of lymph nodes in the supraclavicular part 
of triangle called supraclavicular lymph nodes.
These nodes lie superficial to brachial plexus and 
subclavian vessels.
ANTERIOR TRIANGLE
The anterior triangle is the triangular space on the side of 
the neck, in front of the sternocleidomastoid (for detail see 
Chapter 6, page 87).
• Brachial plexus block: The brachial plexus in the 
posterior triangle is located below the line extending from 
the posterior border of the sternocleidomastoid (at the 
level of cricoid cartilage) to the midpoint on the superior 
aspect of the clavicle. In this region, the brachial plexus 
can be blocked by injection of a local anesthetic between 
the first rib and the skin above the clavicle. The brachial 
plexus block is sometimes done to perform surgical 
procedures in the upper limb.
• Pulsations of subclavian artery can be felt at the root of 
the neck by pressing behind clavicle at the posterior 
border of the sternocleidomastoid muscle.
The hemorrhage from the arteries of the upper limb 
can be stopped by pressing subclavian artery on to the 
first rib lateral to the lower end of the sternocleidomastoid 
muscle.
• Swelling in the posterior triangle: The most common 
cause of swelling in the posterior triangle is due to 
enlargement of lymph nodes. The supraclavicular lymph 
nodes are commonly involved and enlarged in tuberculo-
sis, Hodgkin’s disease, and malignant growth of breast, 
arm, and chest. The left supraclavicular lymph nodes 
(also called Virchow’s lymph nodes) are commonly 
involved in metastasis from cancer stomach, cancer tes-
tis, and cancer of other abdominal organs. The biopsy of 
these lymph nodes is helpful in early diagnosis of distant 
malignancies.
Clinical correlation
--- Page 100 ---
Side of the Neck
Golden Facts to Remember
  ‘Key muscle’ of the neck
Sternocleidomastoid
  All the important structures of posterior triangle 
are present deep to prevertebral fascia (fascial 
carpet) except
Spinal accessory nerve
  Most common cause of swelling in the posterior 
triangle 
Enlargement of supraclavicular lymph nodes
  Most commonly injured nerve during removal of 
enlarged cervical lymph nodes in the posterior 
triangle
Spinal accessory nerve
  Most important surface landmark on the side of 
the neck
Sternocleidomastoid
  Virchow’s lymph nodes
Left supraclavicular lymph nodes
  Pulsations of subclavian artery can be felt by
Pressing downwards above the clavicle at the 
posterior border of sternocleidomastoid
  Commonest cause of cervical lymphadenopathy in 
adults
Metastatic deposits of cancer cells in cervical lymph 
nodes
A 65-year-old woman visited her family physician with 
a swelling in her neck in the region of left posterior tri-
angle. The swelling had gradually increased in size. On 
examination, it felt very hard and the physician thought 
that it was due enlarged lymph node/nodes containing 
secondary carcinoma (cancer). He referred her to the 
hospital where she underwent open excisional biopsy 
followed by fine needle aspiration biopsy. Following 
surgery the patient complained that she was not able to 
elevate her left shoulder above 90° to comb her hair. On 
examination, it was found that her left trapezius was 
paralyzed, while left sternocleidomastoid was normal 
and he concluded that the spinal accessory nerve might 
have been excised inadvertently during biopsy.
Questions
1. What could be the cause of paralysis of her left 
trapezius?
2. Describe the course of spinal accessory nerve in the 
posterior triangle.
3. Why is spinal accessory nerve liable to injury 
during the excisional biopsy of enlarged cervical 
lymph nodes in the posterior triangle?
4. Why sternocleidomastoid is not paralyzed?
Answers
1. Injury to spinal accessory nerve which provides 
motor supply to the trapezius.
2. Refer to page 82.
3. Refer to page 82.
4. Because spinal accessory nerve supplies sterno-
cleidomastoid before entering the posterior 
triangle.
Clinical Case Study
--- Page 101 ---
Anterior Region of 
the Neck
CHAPTER
The triangular area on the front of the neck between the two 
sternocleidomastoid muscles is called anterior region of the 
neck. It is limited above by lower border of the body of 
mandible and line extending on either side from the angle of 
the mandible to the mastoid process, and below by the 
suprasternal notch. This area includes both anterior 
triangles, and suprahyoid and infrahyoid areas (Fig. 6.1).
The anterior region of the neck is divided by the anterior 
median line (extending from symphysis menti to the jugular 
notch) into two anterior triangles of the neck.
Before going into details of anterior triangles of the neck, 
it is of great clinical importance to know the structures in the 
anterior median line of the neck. The identification of these 
structures is essential while performing tracheostomy. It is 
also useful in clinical examination of midline swellings of the 
neck.
STRUCTURES IN THE ANTERIOR 
MEDIAN REGION OF THE NECK
The anterior median region of the neck is 2–3 cm wide 
strip extending from symphysis menti to the suprasternal 
notch. Deep to skin and underlying the superficial and 
deep cervical fasciae, the anterior median region presents 
following 
structures 
from 
above 
downwards 
(Fig. 6.2):
1. Symphysis menti: Its lower border can be felt where the 
two halves of the body of the mandible unite in the 
midline.
Fig. 6.1 Schematic diagram of anterior median region of 
the neck showing suprahyoid and infrahyoid area.
Suprahyoid
area
Submandibular
triangle
Submental
triangle
Posterior belly of
digastric
Hyoid bone
Superior belly of 
omohyoid
Anterior median line of 
the neck
Anterior belly of
digastric
Suprasternal notch
Lower border of 
body of the mandible
Carotid triangle
Line representing
anterior border of
sternocleidomastoid
Muscular triangle
Infrahyoid area
Fig. 6.2 Structures in the anterior median line of the neck.
Symphysis menti
Fibrous raphe
Hyoid bone
Cricoid
cartilage
First tracheal
ring
Suprasternal 
notch
Jugular veinous 
arch
Inferior thyroid 
veins
Isthmus of
thyroid gland
Median
cricothyroid
ligament
Angle of thyroid
cartilage
Thyrohyoid
membrane
Upper border of
thyroid cartilage
Anterior border of
sternocleidomastoid
--- Page 102 ---
Anterior Region of the Neck
2. Fibrous raphe: It extends from symphysis menti to the 
hyoid bone. Mylohyoid muscles of both sides meet along 
this raphe to form the floor of the mouth (diaphragma 
oris).
3. Hyoid bone: It is a horseshoe-shaped bone suspended 
inferior to mandible by stylohyoid ligaments like 
children’s swing. Hyoid bone does not articulate with 
any other bone and has only muscular and ligamentous 
attachments. It lies at the level of C3 vertebra. The 
regions above and below the hyoid bone are called 
suprahyoid region and infrahyoid region, respectively.
4. Median thyrohyoid ligament: It is the midline thickening 
of the thyrohyoid membrane that connects the upper 
border of thyroid cartilage to the lower border and 
greater cornu of the hyoid bone. The membrane is 
separated from the hyoid bone by a subhyoid bursa.
5. Upper border of the thyroid cartilage: It is notched and 
can be felt. It lies opposite the body of T4 vertebra.
6. Angle of the thyroid cartilage: It forms the laryngeal 
prominence, which is more prominent in adult males 
and is called Adam’s apple.
Median cricothyroid ligament: It is the midline thickening 
of the cricothyroid membrane extending between upper 
border of cricoid cartilage and lower border of the thyroid 
cartilage.
8. Cricoid cartilage: It lies at the lower border of C6 
vertebra and is the most important surface landmark on 
the front of the neck because a number of important 
structures are located at this level, such as (a) junction of 
larynx and trachea, (b) junction of pharynx and 
esophagus, and (c) anterior tubercle of transverse 
process of C6 vertebra (carotid tubercle) against which 
common carotid artery can be compressed.
9. First tracheal ring: It can be felt by gentle pressure just 
above the isthmus of the thyroid gland.
10. Isthmus of the thyroid gland: It lies in front of the 2nd,
3rd, and 4th tracheal rings.
11. Inferior thyroid veins: After emerging from isthmus 
they run downwards to lie in front of the 5th, 6th, and 
7th tracheal rings.
12. Thyroidea ima artery: When present, it ascends in front 
of the trachea to the isthmus of the thyroid; it usually 
arises from the brachiocephalic artery.
13. Jugular venous arch: This traverses the venous arch, 
which connects the anterior jugular veins just above the 
suprasternal notch.
14. Suprasternal notch: It can be felt between the anterior 
ends of the clavicle. It lies opposite the lower border 
of the body of T2 vertebra. Occasionally, left 
brachiocephalic vein and brachiocephalic artery may lie 
in front of trachea in the suprasternal notch.
• The most common anterior midline swellings of 
the neck are: (a) enlarged submental lymph nodes, 
(b) thyroglossal cyst, and (c) goitre.
• The tracheostomy is most commonly done in the 
retrothyroid region after cutting the isthmus of thyroid gland 
(for detail see page 164).
• The cut-throat wounds are most commonly observed 
just above or below the hyoid bone. The main vessels of 
 the neck, viz. common carotid, internal and external 
carotid arteries, and internal jugular vein, usually escape 
the injury as they are automatically pushed backwards to 
the deeper plane, when neck is inadvertently extended by 
the culprit, before being cut.
Clinical correlation
ANTERIOR TRIANGLE OF THE NECK
The anterior triangle of the neck is a large triangular space 
on each side of the neck, in front of sternocleidomastoid 
with its apex directed downwards and base directed upwards 
(Fig. 6.3).
Anterior border of
sternocleidomastoid
(Posterior boundary)
Anterior median
line of the neck
(Anterior boundary)
Line joining the angle of
the mandible to the
mastoid process
Base
Lower border of the
body of the mandible
MUSCULAR TRIANGLE
CAROTID
TRIANGLE
SUBMENTAL 
TRIANGLE (½)
DIGASTRIC 
TRIANGLE
Suprasternal notch (Apex)
Fig. 6.3 Boundaries and subdivisions of the right anterior 
triangle.
--- Page 103 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
Boundaries (Fig. 6.3)
Anterior: Anterior median line of the neck.
Posterior: Anterior border of the sternocleidomastoid 
muscle.
Base: 
 Lower border of the body of mandible and a line 
extending from the angle of mandible to the 
mastoid process.
Apex: 
 Suprasternal notch at the meeting point between 
anterior border of sternocleidomastoid and 
anterior median line.
Roof: 
Investing layer of deep cervical fascia.
The superficial fascia over the fascial roof contains 
platysma in the upper and anterior parts. The cervical branch 
of facial nerve and ascending and descending branches of 
transverse cervical cutaneous nerve traverse the plane 
between the platysma and the fascial roof of the triangle.
SUBDIVISIONS
For convenience of description, the anterior triangle has 
been subdivided, by the digastric muscle and superior belly 
of omohyoid muscle, into the following 3½ triangles 
(Fig. 6.3):
1. Submental triangle (half only).
2. Digastric (submandibular) triangle.
3. Carotid triangle.
4. Muscular triangle.
Before studying the subdivisions of anterior triangle, it is 
appropriate for students to know the attachments of 
digastric and omohyoid muscles, which are used for its 
subdivision.
Digastric muscle (Fig. 6.5A): It has two bellies – posterior and 
anterior. The triangular posterior belly arises from the digastric 
notch on the medial surface of the base of the mastoid process, 
and runs downwards and forwards, towards the hyoid bone. 
The narrow anterior belly arises from digastric fossa on the 
base of the mandible near symphysis menti and runs 
downwards and backwards, towards the hyoid bone. Above 
the hyoid bone the two bellies are connected by an intermediate 
tendon, which is anchored to the hyoid bone by a fascial sling 
of investing layer of deep cervical fascia.
Omohyoid muscle (Fig. 6.9): It consists of superior and 
inferior bellies joined at an angle by an intermediate tendon. 
The inferior belly arises from upper border of scapula, near 
the suprascapular notch, it then passes behind the 
sternocleidomastoid and ends there in an intermediate 
tendon. The superior belly begins at the intermediate tendon 
and passes almost vertically upwards to be attached to the 
lower border of the hyoid bone. The intermediate tendon lies 
at the level of arch of cricoid cartilage and anchored to the 
clavicle by fascial sling derived from investing layer of deep 
cervical fascia.
Submental Triangle (Fig. 6.4)
It is actually a median triangle on the front of neck below the 
chin and above the hyoid bone. It thus occupies the upper 
portions of both the anterior triangles.
Boundaries
On each side: Anterior belly of digastric muscle.
Base: Body of hyoid bone.
Apex: Chin or symphysis menti.
Floor
It is formed by the two mylohyoid muscles meeting at the 
median fibrous raphe extending from symphysis menti to 
the hyoid bone.
Roof
Investing layer of deep cervical fascia.
Contents
1. Submental lymph nodes (3 or 4 in number). Efferents 
from these nodes pass to the submandibular lymph 
nodes.
2. Submental veins and commencement of anterior jugular 
veins.
N.B. The contents of the triangle actually lie in the 
superficial fascia over the roof of the submental triangle.
Infections of floor of mouth, tip of tongue, and incisor teeth 
cause painful enlargement of submental lymph nodes 
because lymph from these structures is drained into these 
nodes.
Clinical correlation
Digastric (Submandibular) Triangle (Fig. 6.5 A, B)
It is so named because it is located between the two bellies of 
the digastric muscle and below the base of the mandible.
Fig. 6.4 Boundaries and contents of the submental triangle.
Hyoid bone 
Anterior
jugular
veins
Mylohyoid muscle 
Anterior belly of 
digastric muscle 
Submental 
lymph nodes
--- Page 104 ---
Anterior Region of the Neck
Boundaries
Anteroinferiorly: Anterior belly of digastric muscle.
Posteroinferiorly: Posterior belly of digastric muscle, 
supplemented by stylohyoid muscle.
Base: 
 It is formed by the base of the mandible 
and imaginary line joining the angle of 
the mandible to the mastoid process.
Apex: 
 It is formed by the intermediate tendon of 
the digastric muscle, being bound down 
to hyoid bone by a fascial sling derived 
from investing layer of deep cervical 
fascia.
Floor
It is formed by mylohyoid (anteriorly), hyoglossus, and small 
part of the middle constrictor (posteriorly).
Roof
It is formed by investing layer of deep cervical fascia, which 
splits to enclose the submandibular salivary gland. In the 
superficial fascia over the roof lies platysma, cervical branch 
of facial nerve, and ascending branch of transverse cervical 
nerve.
Contents
The digastric triangle is subdivided into anterior and 
posterior parts by the stylomandibular ligament, which 
extends from the tip of the styloid process to the angle of the 
mandible. The posterior part of the triangle is continuous 
above with the parotid region.
Contents in the anterior part of the triangle:
1. Submandibular salivary gland.
2. Submandibular lymph nodes.
3. Hypoglossal nerve.
4. Facial vein (lies superficial to the gland).
5. Facial artery (lies deep to the gland).
6. Submental artery.
7. Mylohyoid nerve and vessels.
Contents in the posterior part of the triangle:
1. External carotid artery.
2. Carotid sheath and its contents.
3. Structures passing between the external and internal 
carotid arteries (for details refer to page 241).
All these structures are discussed in detail in the 
submandibular region (Chapter 9, p. 131).
Submandibular triangle is the common site of swellings 
due to: (a) involvement of submandibular lymph nodes as 
they drain lymph from widespread areas such as anterior 
two-third of tongue (except tip), floor of mouth, frontal, 
ethmoidal, and maxillary air sinuses, etc. and (b) enlargement 
of the submandibular gland. The efferents from submandibular 
lymph nodes mostly pass to jugulo-omohyoid and partially to 
jugulodigastric nodes situated along the internal jugular vein.
Clinical correlation
Carotid Triangle (Fig. 6.6)
It is so called because it contains all the three carotid arteries, 
viz. common carotid, internal carotid, and external carotid.
Boundaries
Superiorly: 
 Posterior belly of digastric supplemented 
by stylohyoid.
Anteroinferiorly: Superior belly of omohyoid.
Posteriorly: 
 Anterior border of sternocleidomastoid.
Roof: 
 It is formed by investing layer of deep 
cervical fascia. The superficial fascia over 
the roof contains platysma, cervical branch 
Fig. 6.5 Digastric (submandibular) triangle: A, boundaries 
and floor; B, boundaries and contents.
Middle
constrictor
(small part)
Hyoglossus
Mylohyoid
Floor
Middle
constrictor of
pharynx
Posterior
belly of
digastric
Anterior
belly of
digastric
Styloid process and
muscles attached to it
Internal
jugular
vein
Facial artery
Mylohyoid
nerve and
vessels
Submental
artery
Hypoglossal
nerve
Submandibular
gland
Submandibular
lymph nodes
Facial vein
--- Page 105 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
of facial nerve and transverse cervical nerve 
(a cutaneous branch of the cervical plexus).
Floor: 
It is formed by the following four muscles:
1. Thyrohyoid.
2. Hyoglossus.
3. Middle constrictor.
4. Inferior constrictor.
Contents
1. Carotid arteries
(a) Common carotid artery
(b) Internal carotid artery
(c) External carotid artery and its first five branches.
2. Carotid sinus and carotid body.
3. Internal jugular vein.
4. Last three cranial nerves
(a) Vagus nerve
(b) Spinal accessory nerve
(c) Hypoglossal nerve.
5. Carotid sheath
6. Ansa cervicalis.
7. Cervical part of the sympathetic chain.
8. Deep cervical lymph nodes.
Fig. 6.6 Carotid triangle: A, boundaries and floor; B, boundaries and contents.
Sternocleidomastoid 
Inferior constrictor of pharynx
Cricoid cartilage
Thyroid cartilage
Superior belly of omohyoid
Thyrohyoid 
Hyoid bone
Hyoid bone
Hyoglossus
Posterior belly of digastric 
Middle constrictor of pharynx
Spinal accessory nerve
Vagus nerve
Internal jugular vein
Internal carotid artery
Occipital artery
External carotid artery
Hypoglossal nerve
Superior thyroid artery
Ascending
pharyngeal artery
Lingual artery
Facial artery
Carotid body
Carotid sinus
Ansa cervicalis
--- Page 106 ---
Anterior Region of the Neck
N.B. The major contents of carotid triangle are common 
carotid artery, internal carotid artery, external carotid artery, 
internal jugular vein, and last three cranial nerves, all 
overlapped by sternocleidomastoid.
The carotid triangle provides good view of all its contents 
only if sternocleidomastoid is retracted slightly backwards.
Relevant Features of the Contents of the Carotid Triangle
Common carotid artery
It ascends from just behind the inferior angle of the carotid 
triangle in the carotid sheath under cover of anterior border 
of sternocleidomastoid and in front of lower 4 cervical 
transverse processes and at the level of the upper border of 
the thyroid cartilage divides into external and internal 
carotid arteries. The common carotid artery gives no other 
branches in the neck (for details see page 237).
Internal carotid artery
It runs straight upwards as the continuation of the common 
carotid artery.
N.B. The common carotid artery and its continuation, the 
internal carotid artery can be represented in living body by a 
straight line from sternoclavicular joint to the retromandibular 
fossa.
The common carotid artery can be compressed against the 
prominent anterior tubercle of transverse process of the 6th 
cervical vertebra called carotid tubercle by pressing 
medially and posteriorly with the thumb. The carotid tubercle 
of the 6th cervical vertebra is about 4  cm above the 
sternoclavicular joint.
Clinical correlation
External carotid artery
It ascends anteromedial to the internal carotid artery and 
gives the following five branches in the triangle:
1. Ascending pharyngeal artery (first branch).
2. Superior thyroid artery.
3. Lingual artery.
4. Facial artery.
5. Occipital artery.
 Ascending pharyngeal artery: It is a slender artery that 
arises from the medial aspect of external carotid artery 
near its lower end. It ascends in the deeper plane on the 
side of the pharynx (for details see page 240).
 Superior thyroid artery: It arises from the front and 
descends downwards and forwards to pass deep to the 
infrahyoid muscles to reach the upper part of the thyroid 
gland (for details see page 238).
 Lingual artery: It arises from the front aspect of external 
carotid artery, opposite the tip of greater cornu of hyoid 
bone. It then runs upwards and forwards forming a 
characteristic loop over the greater cornu of the hyoid 
and disappear deep to the hyoglossus muscle. Before 
disappearing it gives rise to suprahyoid artery, which 
runs superficial to hyoglossus above the hyoid (for 
details see page 238).
N.B. The loop of lingual artery above the greater cornu of 
hyoid bone permits free movements of hyoid bone without 
damaging the artery.
 Facial artery: It arises from the front aspect of external 
carotid artery just above the lingual artery and runs 
upwards on the superior constrictor deep to digastric and 
stylohyoid muscles (for details see page 239).
 Occipital artery: It arises from the posterior aspect of 
external carotid artery at the lower border of posterior 
belly of digastric muscle and runs backwards superficial 
to internal carotid artery, internal jugular vein, and last 
three cranial nerves along the lower border of posterior 
belly of digastrics (for details see page 239).
Hypoglossal nerve
It descends between the internal jugular vein and internal 
carotid artery. Then just above the level of greater cornu of 
hyoid bone, it hooks around the origin of the occipital artery, 
runs forwards, crossing in front of internal carotid artery, 
external carotid artery, and loop of lingual artery to run on 
the hyoglossus muscle above the hyoid bone.
As it crosses the internal carotid artery, it gives off the 
superior root of ansa cervicalis (also called descendens 
hypoglossi), which descends on the anterior wall of the 
internal and common carotid arteries and becomes 
embedded in the anterior wall of the carotid sheath.
Deep cervical lymph nodes
They lie on and along the internal jugular vein (for details 
see page 249).
Internal jugular vein
It is partly hidden by the posterior edge of the 
sternocleidomastoid. It descends posterolateral to common 
and internal carotid arteries and receives the following three 
veins in the region of carotid triangle:
1. Lingual vein.
2. Common facial vein.
3. Superior thyroid vein.
 The lingual vein lies just below and parallel to the 
hypoglossal nerve, crosses external and internal carotid 
arteries to join the internal jugular vein.
 The common facial vein after crossing the digastric 
triangle, crosses the upper part of carotid triangle to drain 
into the internal jugular vein.
 The superior thyroid vein crosses the lower part of the 
triangle to end into the internal jugular vein.
--- Page 107 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
Vagus nerve
It descends vertically downwards, first between the internal 
carotid artery and internal jugular vein and then between 
common carotid artery and internal jugular vein. It gives the 
following two branches in the carotid triangle.
Pharyngeal branch: It runs inferomedially between the 
external and internal carotid arteries to join the 
pharyngeal plexus on the superior constrictor of the 
pharynx.
2. Superior laryngeal nerve: It runs on a deep plane, deep 
to both internal and external carotid arteries, where it 
divides into internal and external laryngeal nerves. The 
internal laryngeal nerve (sensory) passes forwards to 
disappear deep to thyrohyoid muscle; there it pierces 
the thyrohyoid membrane to supply the laryngeal 
mucosa.
The external laryngeal nerve (motor) descends to supply 
the inferior constrictor and cricothyroid muscles after 
passing deep to the superior belly of the omohyoid.
Accessory nerve
It runs downwards and backwards across the upper part of 
the triangle, superficial to the internal jugular vein to enter 
the sternocleidomastoid muscle, which it supplies.
Carotid sheath
It is a facial sheath which encloses internal jugular vein, and 
internal and common carotid arteries. The vagus nerve lies 
in between the vein and the artery on a deeper plane (for 
details refer to Chapter 4). The ansa cervicalis is embedded 
in its anterior wall whereas the cervical sympathetic chain 
lies just deep to its posterior wall on the prevertebral fascia.
Carotid sinus
It is a fusiform dilatation at the terminal end of common 
carotid artery or at the beginning of internal carotid artery. It 
has rich innervation from glossopharyngeal, vagus, and 
sympathetic nerves. The carotid sinus acts as a baroreceptor 
(pressure receptor) and regulates the blood pressure in the 
cerebral arteries.
In an individual with carotid sinus hypersensitivity, pressure 
on carotid sinuses can cause enough slowing of heart rate, 
fall in blood pressure, and cerebral ischemia that will lead to 
fainting (syncope). Individuals with hypersensitive carotid 
sinuses often had sudden attacks of syncope on rotation of 
head especially when wearing a shirt with tight collar or a tie 
with tight knot, condition called carotid sinus syndrome. 
Symptoms can be relieved by periarterial neurectomy.
Clinical correlation
Carotid body
It is a small oval structure situated behind the bifurcation of 
the common carotid artery. It is reddish-brown and receives 
rich nerve supply from glossopharyngeal, vagus, and 
sympathetic nerves. It acts as a chemoreceptor and responds 
to the changes in the oxygen and carbon dioxide content of 
the blood. The excess of CO2 and reduced O2 tension in 
blood stimulates it causing increase in blood pressure and 
heart rate.
Ansa cervicalis (Figs 6.7 and 6.8)
The ansa cervicalis (ansa hypoglossi) is a U-shaped nerve 
loop present in the region of the carotid triangle embedded 
in the anterior wall of the carotid sheath. It is derived from 
Fig. 6.7 Formation and distribution of the ansa cervicalis.
Fig. 6.8 Location and relations of the ansa cervicalis.
Meningeal branch (C1)
Hypoglossal nerve
Nerve to geniohyoid [C1]
Nerve to thyrohyoid [C1]
Superior root
(Descendens hypoglossi)
To superior belly of
omohyoid
To sternohyoid
To sternothyroid
To inferior belly of
omohyoid
Ansa cervicalis
Inferior root
(Descendens cervicalis)
Ventral rami of
1st, 2nd, and 3rd
cervical spinal nerves
Posterior belly of
digastric
Mastoid process
Spinal accessory
Occipital artery
Inferior root of
ansa cervicalis
Inferior belly of
omohyoid
Clavicle
Manubrium sterni
Vagus nerve
Ansa cervicalis
Nerve to superior
belly of omohyoid
Superior root of
ansa cervicalis
Nerve to thyrohyoid
Superior thyroid
artery
Anterior belly of
digastric muscle
Glossopharyngeal
nerve
Hypoglossal
nerve
--- Page 108 ---
Anterior Region of the Neck
ventral rami of C1, C2, and C3 spinal nerves. It supplies all 
the infrahyoid muscles except thyrohyoid, which is supplied 
by nerve to thyrohyoid (C1) from hypoglossal nerve.
Roots: Ansa cervicalis has the following two roots:
1. Superior root (descendens hypoglossi) is formed by the 
descending branch of the hypoglossal nerve carrying C1 
spinal nerve fibres. It descends downwards over internal 
and common carotid arteries.
2. Inferior root (descendens cervicalis) is derived from C2 
and C3 spinal nerves. As this root descends, it first 
winds round the internal jugular vein and then 
continues anteroinferiorly to join the superior root in 
front of the common carotid artery at the level of 
cricoid cartilage.
Distribution
1. Superior root gives branch to superior belly of omohyoid.
2. Dependent loop gives branches to sternohyoid, 
sternothyroid, and inferior belly of the omohyoid.
Muscular Triangle (Figs 6.1 and 6.3)
Boundaries
Anterior: 
 Anterior median line of the neck, extending 
from hyoid bone to the suprasternal notch.
Anterosuperior: Superior belly of the omohyoid.
Posteroinferior: Anterior border of sternocleidomastoid.
Floor
It is formed by sternothyroid, sternohyoid, and thyrohyoid 
muscles.
Roof
It is formed by investing layer of deep cervical fascia. The 
superficial fascia over the roof contains anterior jugular vein 
and associated lymph nodes.
Contents
Infrahyoid muscles, viz. sternothyroid, sternohyoid, and 
thyrohyoid.
The important deeper structures in the region of muscular 
triangle are thyroid gland, trachea, and esophagus. They are 
studied separately.
N.B. Supra and infrahyoid areas: These are the areas on the 
front of neck above and below the hyoid bone, respectively.
Suprahyoid area corresponds to submental triangle (for 
details see submental triangle on page 88).
Infrahyoid area is bounded superolaterally by the superior 
bellies of the omohyoid muscles and inferolaterally by the 
sternocleidomastoid muscles. It includes muscular triangles 
of both anterior triangles.
The infrahyoid area contains strap (ribbon-like) muscles 
of the neck. Underneath these muscles lie all important 
structures. From superficial to deep, these are:
1. Thyroid and parathyroid glands.
2. Larynx and trachea.
3. Hypopharynx (laryngopharynx) and esophagus.
SUPRAHYOID AND INFRAHYOID 
MUSCLES OF THE NECK
Suprahyoid Muscles of the Neck
The suprahyoid muscles comprise following four paired 
muscles.
1. Digastric.
2. Stylohyoid.
3. Mylohyoid.
4. Geniohyoid.
These muscles are described in detail in Chapter 9.
Infrahyoid Muscles of the Neck 
(Strap Muscles of the Neck)
The infrahyoid muscles are ribbon-like and comprise 
following four paired muscles (Fig. 6.9).
1. Sternothyroid.
2. Sternohyoid.
3. Thyrohyoid.
4. Omohyoid.
Fig. 6.9 Origin and insertion of the infrahyoid muscles.
Thyrohyoid
Oblique line on
lamina of
thyroid cartilage
Sternothyroid
Manubrium sterni
Superior
border of
scapula
Suprascapular
ligament
Inferior belly of omohyoid
Intermediate tendon of 
omohyoid
Superior belly of omohyoid
Hyoid bone
Fascial sling binding the intermediate
tendon of omohyoid to clavicle
--- Page 109 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
N.B. Developmentally, the infrahyoid muscles are the 
derivatives of the longitudinal muscle sheet that extends 
vertically from the symphysis menti to pubic symphysis. This 
sheet ultimately divides into different segments; some of 
them disappear altogether. The remaining segments are 
represented by:
(a) geniohyoid, above the hyoid,
(b) infrahyoid muscles, between the hyoid and sternum,
(c) sternalis (occasional) in front of sternum, and
(d) rectus abdominis and pyramidalis (occasional) in the 
anterior abdominal wall.
The attachment of inferior belly of omohyoid to scapula 
is secondary to its migration from its initial attachment to 
medial end of the clavicle.
The infrahyoid muscles are arranged into two layers with 
two muscles in each layer, viz.
1. Superficial layer
(a) Sternohyoid
(b) Omohyoid.
2. Deep layer
(a) Sternothyroid
(b) Thyrohyoid.
Nerve Supply
All are supplied by ventral rami of C1, C2, and C3 spinal 
nerves.
The sternohyoid, omohyoid, and thyrohyoid are supplied 
by the ansa cervicalis and its superior root. The thyrohyoid 
is innervated directly by a branch from the hypoglossal 
nerve carrying fibres of ventral ramus of C1. The origin, 
insertion, and actions of individual muscles are presented in 
Table 6.1.
N.B. All the infrahyoid muscles depress the hyoid bone 
following its elevation during swallowing.
The thyrohyoid also elevates the larynx when the hyoid is 
fixed by the suprahyoid muscles.
Table 6.1 Origin, insertion, and actions of the infrahyoid muscles
Muscle
Origin
Insertion
Actions
Sternohyoid (thin narrow 
strap muscle)
Posterior surface of manubrium 
and adjoining part of clavicle, and 
posterior sternoclavicular ligament
Medial part of the lower 
border of the hyoid bone
Depresses hyoid bone following 
its elevation during swallowing
Sternothyroid (shorter and 
wider than sternohyoid)
Posterior surface of the manubrium 
and adjoining part of the first 
costal cartilage
Oblique line on the lamina of 
thyroid cartilage
Depresses the larynx following its 
elevation during swallowing
Thyrohyoid (It is an 
upward extension of the 
sternothyroid being broken 
by the oblique line on the 
thyroid lamina)
Oblique line on the lamina of 
thyroid cartilage
Lower border of the greater 
cornu and adjoining part of 
the body of the hyoid bone
• Depresses the hyoid bone 
during swallowing
• Elevates the larynx when hyoid 
bone is fixed by suprahyoid 
muscles
Omohyoid consists of 
inferior and superior bellies 
united by an intermediate 
tendon
• Inferior belly from upper border 
of scapula near the suprascapular 
notch and occasionally from 
superior transverse scapular 
ligament
• Superior belly proceeds upwards 
from the intermediate tendon 
almost vertically upwards near 
the lateral border of sternohyoid
Lower border of the body of 
the hyoid bone lateral to the 
sternohyoid. The intermediate 
tendon is bound to the clavicle 
by a fascial pulley derived from 
investing layer of deep cervical 
fascia
Depresses the hyoid bone 
following its elevation during 
swallowing
--- Page 110 ---
Anterior Region of the Neck
Golden Facts to Remember
  Most important pressoreceptor in the body
Carotid sinus
  Most important landmark in the neck
Cricoid cartilage
  Commonest site of tracheostomy
Retrothyroid (i.e. behind the isthmus of thyroid 
gland)
  Carotid tubercle (Chassaignac’s tubercle)
Prominent anterior tubercle of the transverse process 
of sixth cervical vertebra
  Carotid pulse can be easily palpated
Just beneath the anterior border of 
sternocleidomastoid at the level of superior border 
of thyroid cartilage
  All the strap muscles of the neck are supplied by 
the branches of ansa cervicalis except
Thyrohyoid muscle which is supplied by a branch of 
hypoglossal nerve carrying C1 fibres
  Potato tumor
Tumor arising from carotid body (also called carotid 
body tumor)
  Arteriosclerosis of common carotid and/or internal 
carotid artery can cause
Cerebrovascular ischemia (cerebral stroke)
CASE 1
A 35-year-old man complained to his physician that he 
is a victim of sudden attacks of syncope (fainting) from 
sudden rotation of his head especially when wearing a 
tight collar or tie. He was told by the physician that he 
was suffering from a disease called carotid sinus 
syndrome and a surgical procedure may be needed to 
relieve his symptoms.
Questions
1. What is carotid sinus?
2. What are the functions of carotid sinus?
3. Mention the nerve supply of the carotid sinus.
4. Mention the surgical procedure performed to 
relieve the symptoms.
Answers
1. It is a fusiform dilatation in the terminal part of 
common carotid artery and the commencement of 
internal carotid artery.
2. It is the main pressoreceptor of the body and 
regulates the blood pressure in the cerebral arteries.
3. (a) Carotid sinus branch of glossopharyngeal nerve.
 
(b) Twigs from vagus and cervical sympathetic 
chain.
4. Periarterial neurectomy.
CASE 2
A 75-year-old man visited his physician and complained 
that he is having a small painless swelling below his 
chin and his tip of tongue is ulcerated. On examination 
the physician found that the swelling was single and 
located in the submental triangle. It was hard mobile, 
and not attached to the skin.
Questions
1. What are the boundaries of the submental triangle?
2. Give the number of lymph nodes located in this 
triangle.
3. Name the structures drained by submental lymph 
nodes.
4. Name the veins which commence in the submental 
triangle.
Answers
1. Refer to submental triangle on page number 88.
2. Three or four.
3. Floor of mouth, incisor teeth, tip of tongue.
4. Anterior jugular veins.
Clinical Case Study
--- Page 111 ---
Back of the Neck and 
Cervical Spinal Column
CHAPTER
BACK OF THE NECK
The back of the neck is limited above by external occipital 
protuberance and superior nuchal lines, and below by spine 
of C7 vertebra and horizontal lines extending on either side 
from it to the acromial process of scapula.
The important structures on the back of the neck include 
ligamentum nuchae, extensor muscles of the neck, 
suboccipital triangle and arterial anastomosis around the 
semispinalis capitis.
The structures encountered in the suboccipital region 
during 
surgical 
procedure/dissection 
shown 
Figure 7.1.
Surface Landmarks
1. External occipital protuberance: It is a bony projection 
felt at the upper end of the nuchal furrow—a vertical 
groove in the midline on the back of the neck.
2. Superior nuchal lines: These are curved bony ridges 
passing laterally from external occipital protuberance. 
Their convexity faces upwards.
3. Spine of 7th cervical vertebra: It is knob-like bony 
projection felt at the lower end of the nuchal furrow. The 
spines of other cervical vertebrae are covered by 
ligamentum nuchae and hence cannot be felt.
4. Acromion process: It is felt as a bony edge immediately 
above the bulge of the deltoid muscle.
Fig. 7.1 Dissection of suboccipital region showing superficial structures on the left side and deep structures on the right side.
Obliquus capitis superior
3rd occipital nerve
Greater occipital nerve
Semispinalis capitis
Rectus capitis posterior major
Vertebral artery
Dorsal ramus of
first cervical nerve
Communication between
C1 and C2 nerves
Dorsal ramus of
second cervical nerve
Longissimus capitis
Semispinalis capitis
Greater occipital nerve
Occipital artery
Lesser occipital nerve
Great auricular nerve
Sternocleidomastoid
Trapezius
Cutaneous branches of C4 and C5
--- Page 112 ---
Back of the Neck and Cervical Spinal Column
Soft Tissues on the Back of the Neck
The soft tissues on the back of the neck are divided into four 
layers. From superficial to deep these are:
1. Skin (cutaneous innervation).
2. Superficial fascia.
3. Deep fascia.
4. Muscles.
SKIN
The skin on the back of the neck is supplied by the medial 
branches of the dorsal rami of C2, C3, and C4 spinal 
nerves. (The dorsal ramus of the C1 does not divide into 
medial and lateral branches and does not give a cutaneous 
branch.)
The cutaneous nerves derived from the medial branches 
of dorsal rami of C2, C3, and C4 are (Fig. 7.1):
1. Greater occipital nerve (C2): It pierces the deep fascia 
on the level with the superior nuchal line 2.5 cm lateral 
to the external occipital protuberance and supply the 
posterior part of the scalp as far as the vertex. It is the 
thickest cutaneous nerve in the body.
2. Third occipital nerve (C3): It pierces the deep fascia 
medial to the greater occipital nerve, a little below the 
superior nuchal line. It is a small cutaneous nerve and 
supplies the skin of the nape of the neck up to the 
external occipital protuberance.
3. Cutaneous branches of C4 and C5: These branches 
pierce the deep fascia close to the midline in series with 
the 3rd occipital nerve. They supply the adjacent skin.
SUPERFICIAL FASCIA
The superficial fascia (subcutaneous tissue) of the back is 
thick and in spite of its fat content, it is very tough. It contains 
cutaneous nerves and vessels. The cutaneous nerves are 
greater occipital, third occipital, and cutaneous branch of C4 
and C5 (described above).
The cutaneous vessels are occipital artery and minute 
twigs derived from second part of the vertebral artery. The 
occipital artery appears 2.5 cm from midline and 
accompanies the greater occipital nerve.
DEEP FASCIA
The deep fascia of the back is called nuchal fascia. It is 
attached in the median plane to the spines, supraspinous 
ligaments, and ligamentum nuchae. Extending laterally, it 
sheaths the muscles of the back.
LIGAMENTUM NUCHAE (Fig. 7.2)
It is a triangular sheet of fibroelastic tissue that forms the 
median fibrous septum between the muscles of the two sides 
of the back of the neck.
The ligamentum nuchae presents three borders:
1. Superior border attached to the external occipital crest.
2. Anterior border attached to the posterior tubercle of 
atlas and the spines of the cervical vertebrae (C2 to C7). 
3. Free posterior border, which extends from the external 
occipital protuberance to the spine of the 7th cervical 
vertebrae.
N.B. In quadrupeds, the ligamentum nuchae is a well-
developed powerful elastic structure, which supports the 
heavy head against the gravity. In human beings, it is not 
that powerful and contains little elastic tissue.
MUSCLES
The muscles of the back of the neck on either side of midline 
are arranged into superficial and deep groups:
1. Superficial group: The muscles of this group are 
arranged into two layers:
(a) First (or superficial) layer—consisting of trapezius 
muscle.
(b) Second (or deep) layer—consisting of levator 
scapulae, rhomboideus minor, and rhomboideus 
major.
Fig. 7.2 Ligamentum nuchae.
External
occipital
protuberance
Posterior
tubercle of atlas
Ligamentum
nuchae
Spinous process
C7 vertebra
--- Page 113 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
2. Deep group: The muscles of this group form the 
intrinsic musculature. The intrinsic muscles are 
arranged in four layers; from superficial to deep, these 
are as follows:
(a) External layer—consisting of splenius capitis and 
splenius cervicis muscles.
(b) Intermediate layer—consisting of longissimus capitis 
and longissimus cervicis muscles.
(c) Deep layer—consisting of semispinalis capitis and 
semispinalis cervicis muscles.
(d) Deepest layer—consisting of suboccipital muscles.
TRAPEZIUS (Fig. 7.3)
The trapezius is a large, flat, triangular muscle, which is 
placed superficially on the back of the neck and thorax. It 
forms the sloping ridge of the neck. The trapezius muscles of 
two sides together form the trapezion (Greek word meaning 
irregular four-sided figure), hence the name trapezius.
Origin: It arises from the medial third of the superior nuchal 
line, external occipital protuberance, ligamentum nuchae, 
spine of C7, and spines of all the thoracic vertebrae.
Insertion
Upper fibres sweep downwards to be inserted into the 
posterior border and upper surface of the lateral third of 
the clavicle.
Middle fibres run horizontally to be inserted into the 
medial border of the acromion and the upper lip of the 
spine of the scapula.
Lower fibres ascend to be inserted into the tubercle of the 
spine of the scapula near its root.
Nerve supply: Supplied by:
1. Spinal accessory nerve (motor).
2. Ventral rami of C3 and C4 (sensory).
Actions
1. The uppermost fibres together with the levator scapulae 
elevate the shoulder and are thus responsible for 
shrugging the shoulder.
2. The middle and lower parts of the muscles act with the 
rhomboids in retracting and steadying the scapula.
The muscles of second layer of superficial group are 
described in detail in the Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb 
and Thorax, Vol. I by Vishram Singh.
SPLENIUS CAPITIS MUSCLE (Fig. 7.4)
Origin: Arises from spines of 7th cervical and upper four 
thoracic vertebrae and lower portion of the ligamentum 
nuchae.
Insertion: Runs upwards and laterally, and emerges from 
beneath the trapezius in the posterior triangle and inserts 
into the mastoid process and lateral third of the superior 
nuchal line.
Nerve supply: Supplied by posterior rami of middle cervical 
nerves.
Fig. 7.3 Origin and insertion of the trapezius. The latissimus 
dorsi is also shown.
TRAPEZIUS
LATISSIMUS DORSI
Floor of
bicipital
groove
Spine of
scapula
Acromion
Clavicle
Spines of all the
thoracic vertebrae
Spine of C7
Ligamentum
nuchae
External occipital
protuberance
Medial 1/3rd of
superior nuchal line
Fig. 7.4 Origin and insertion of the splenius capitis. The 
part of splenius cervicis is also seen.
Mastoid process and
lateral one-third of 
superior nuchal line (insertion)
SPLENIUS CAPITIS
SPLENIUS CERVICIS
Spines of upper
thoracic vertebrae and
lower part of
ligamentum nuchae
(origin)
Ligamentum
nuchae
--- Page 114 ---
Back of the Neck and Cervical Spinal Column
Actions: Rotates the head and face to the same side. Acting 
bilaterally, they draw head backwards and extend the neck.
SPLENIUS CERVICIS MUSCLE
Origin: Arises from spines of T3–T6 thoracic vertebrae.
Insertion: Passes deep to splenius capitis, to be inserted into 
the transverse process of the upper four cervical vertebrae.
Nerve supply: Supplied by posterior rami of lower cervical 
nerves.
Actions: Turns the head and face towards the same side. 
Acting bilaterally, they extend the head and neck.
N.B. The splenius (splenius capitis and splenius cervicis 
together) lies deep to trapezius and sternocleidomastoid 
and superficial to semispinalis capitis and levator scapulae. 
It binds the deep extensors of the back of the neck like a 
bandage, hence the name splenius (L. splenius = bandage).
LONGISSIMUS CAPITIS MUSCLE (Fig. 7.5)
Origin: Arises from transverse processes of the lower four 
cervical vertebrae.
Insertion: Inserts into the mastoid process, deep to the 
splenius capitis.
Nerve supply: Supplied by posterior rami of lower cervical 
nerves.
Actions: It extends the head and turns the face to the same 
side.
SEMISPINALIS CAPITIS MUSCLE (Fig. 7.6)
It is long, thick powerful muscle and produces longitudinal 
bulging of the neck on each side of the median furrow. Its 
medial border is free and is in contact with the ligamentum 
nuchae (Fig. 7.6).
Origin: Arises from transverse processes of lower four 
cervical and upper six thoracic vertebrae (C4–T6).
Insertion: Runs vertically upwards and inserted into the 
medial part of the area between the superior and inferior 
nuchal lines of the occipital bones.
Nerve supply: Supplied by posterior rami of spinal nerves, 
usually by medial branches.
Actions: It extends the head.
SEMISPINALIS CERVICIS MUSCLE (Fig. 7.6)
It lies deep to the lower fibres semispinalis capitis.
Origin: Arises from transverse processes of lower cervical 
and upper thoracic vertebrae (C5–T4).
Insertion: Spines of cervical vertebrae (C2–C4).
Nerve supply: Supplied by posterior rami of spinal nerves, 
usually by medial branches.
Actions: It extends the neck.
Neck rigidity: The neck rigidity occurs in meningitis due to 
spasm of extensor muscles on the back of the neck. This is 
caused due to irritation of nerve roots of cervical spinal 
nerves during their passage through the subarachnoid 
space, which is infected in this disease.
Clinical correlation
Fig. 7.5 Origin and insertion of the longissimus capitis.
Mastoid process
deep to splenius
capitis (insertion)
Ligamentum
nuchae
LONGISSIMUS
CAPITIS
Posterior tubercles of
the transverse processes of
lower four cervical vertebrae 
(origin)
Fig. 7.6 Origin and insertion of the semispinalis capitis.
SEMISPINALIS
CAPITIS
Transverse processes of
lower 4 cervical and
upper 6 thoracic vertebrae
(origin)
Ligamentum
nuchae
Medial part of area between
superior and inferior nuchal
lines (insertion)
--- Page 115 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
SUBOCCIPITAL REGION
The suboccipital region is limited above by inferior nuchal line 
of occipital bone; below by massive spine and laminae of the 
axis vertebra; and laterally by the mastoid process and the 
transverse processes of atlas and axis vertebrae (Fig. 7.7). This 
region is clinically important because the neurosurgeons 
approach the posterior cranial fossa through this region.
N.B. This region lies beneath the semispinalis capitis, i.e., 
underneath the apex of the posterior triangle on the side of 
the neck. It is important to remember that posterior triangle 
spirals from front to back, as a result its apex lies on the back 
of the neck.
SUBOCCIPITAL MUSCLES
The suboccipital muscles (Fig. 7.8) are the short postural 
muscles that lie deep in the suboccipital region. They connect 
the 1st cervical vertebra (atlas) to the 2nd cervical vertebra 
(axis), and connect both these vertebrae to the base of the 
skull. The suboccipital muscles cause extension of the head 
at the atlanto-occipital joints and rotation of head and atlas 
on the axis. They can act as extensors and rotators of the 
head but they function chiefly as postural muscles.
On each side, the following four muscles comprise the 
suboccipital group of muscles:
1. Rectus capitis posterior major.
2. Rectus capitis posterior minor.
3. Obliquus capitis inferior.
4. Obliquus capitis superior.
All these muscles are supplied by the dorsal ramus of C1 
spinal nerve (suboccipital nerve). The origin, insertion, 
nerve supply, and actions of these muscles are enumerated 
in Table 7.1.
The posterior cranial fossa is approached by neurosurgeons 
to remove the brain tumor by clearing the suboccipital 
muscles and removing the exposed occipital bone.
Clinical correlation
Rectus capitis posterior major 
Rectus capitis posterior minor 
Rectus capitis posterior minor 
Semispinalis capitis 
Trapezius 
Rectus capitis posterior major 
Obliquus capitis superior 
Sternocleidomastoid 
Splenius capitis 
Longissimus capitis 
Obliquus capitis inferior 
Obliquus capitis inferior (origin)
Obliquus capitis superior 
Superior nuchal line
Inferior nuchal line
Mastoid process
Transverse process of
atlas
Transverse process of
axis
Fig. 7.7 Schematic posterior view of the skull, showing bony boundaries of suboccipital region and sites of the muscular 
attachments.
Posterior tubercle of atlas
Posterior arch of atlas
Posterior atlanto-occipital
membrane
Spine of axis
Obliquus capitis inferior
Obliquus capitis superior
Rectus capitis posterior major
Rectus capitis posterior
minor
Fig. 7.8 Suboccipital muscles. Boundaries and floor of the suboccipital triangle are also seen.
--- Page 116 ---
Back of the Neck and Cervical Spinal Column
SUBOCCIPITAL TRIANGLE (Figs 7.8 and 7.9)
This is a triangular muscular space situated deep in the 
suboccipital region of the neck, one on each side of the 
midline and bounded by four suboccipital muscles.
Boundaries (Fig. 7.8)
Superomedial: Rectus capitis posterior major, supplemented 
by rectus capitis posterior minor.
Superolateral: Obliquus capitis superior.
Inferior: 
Obliquus capitis inferior.
Roof: 
 This is formed by dense fibrous tissue, and 
covered by semispinalis capitis laterally and 
longissimus capitis and splenius capitis 
(occasionally) laterally.
Floor: 
 The floor is formed by (a) posterior arch 
of atlas and (b) posterior atlanto-occipital 
membrane.
Table 7.1 Suboccipital muscles
Muscles
Origin
Insertion
Actions
Rectus capitis posterior major
From spine of axis by a 
pointed tendon
Passes upwards and laterally, and 
inserted by a broad base to the 
lateral part of the inferior nuchal 
line and area of bone below it
Extends the head at 
atlanto-occipital joint
Rectus capitis posterior minor 
(two minor muscles, one on 
each side, fills the triangular gap 
between diverging major 
muscles)
From posterior tubercle of 
the atlas
Passes upwards to be inserted into 
the medial part of the inferior nuchal 
line and area of bone below it
Extend the head at the 
atlanto-occipital joint
Obliquus capitis inferior
From spine of the axis
Passes laterally and slightly upwards 
to be inserted into the transverse 
process of the atlas
Rotates the head to the same 
side at the atlantoaxial joint
Obliquus capitis superior
From transverse process of 
the atlas
Passes upwards and backwards to be 
inserted into area between superior 
and inferior nuchal lines of the 
occipital bone, lateral to the semi-
spinalis capitis. Here it overlies the 
insertion of rectus capitis posterior 
major
Rotates the head to the same 
side (lateral flexion) at atlanto-
axial joint. Acting along with its 
counterpart of the opposite side, 
they extend the head at the 
atlanto-occipital joint
Obliquus capitis superior
Splenius capitis
Suboccipital nerve
(dorsal ramus of C1)
Vertebral artery
(third part)
Obliquus capitis inferior
Greater occipital nerve
(medial branch of dorsal ramus of C2)
Rectus capitis posterior major
Vertebral artery (second part)
Rectus capitis posterior minor
Semispinalis capitis
Fig. 7.9 Boundaries and contents of the suboccipital triangle.
--- Page 117 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
Contents
The contents of suboccipital triangle are as follows:
1. Suboccipital plexus of veins.
2. Greater occipital nerve.
3. Dorsal ramus of 1st cervical nerve (suboccipital nerve).
4. Third part of vertebral artery.
N.B. The vertebral artery and the dorsal ramus of the 1st 
cervical nerve lie in a groove on the upper surface of the 
posterior arch of the atlas. Here artery is separated from 
arch by the nerve.
Cisternal puncture is done when lumbar puncture fails to 
take out CSF sample for therapeutic and diagnostic 
purposes. Needle is introduced in the midline just above the 
spine of the axis vertebra. It pierces the posterior atlanto-
occipital membrane at a depth of about 2  inch/5 cm in 
adults. Utmost care should be taken while introducing the 
needle as medulla lies only 1 inch anterior to the posterior 
atlanto-occipital membrane which, if damaged, may be fatal.
Clinical correlation
Suboccipital plexus of the veins
It lies in and around the suboccipital triangle. It connects the 
following veins:
1. Muscular veins from neighboring six muscles.
2. Occipital veins.
3. Internal vertebral venous plexus.
4. Condylar emissary vein from sigmoid sinus.
5. Deep cervical vein.
6. Plexus of the veins around vertebral artery.
Thus it provides a number of alternative routes for venous 
drainage.
The connection between suboccipital venous plexus and 
internal vertebral venous plexus serves as a path of 
intracranial infection in carbuncles of the neck.
The carbuncle is an infective gangrene of subcutaneous 
tissue following infection of hair follicles.
Clinical correlation
Greater occipital nerve
It is the thickest cutaneous nerve in the body. It winds around 
the middle of the lower border of the inferior oblique muscle, 
and runs upwards and medially. It crosses the suboccipital 
triangle and pierces the semispinalis capitis and trapezius 
muscles to supply the back of scalp up to the vertex.
Occipital artery in the suboccipital region
The occipital artery runs deep to the mastoid process and 
muscles attached to it, e.g., sternocleidomastoid, splenius 
capitis and longissimus capitis. The artery then crosses the 
rectus capitis lateralis, the superior oblique, and semispinalis 
capitis muscles at the apex of the posterior triangle. Finally, it 
pierces the trapezius 2.5 cm away from the midline and 
comes to lie along the greater occipital nerve. It presents a 
tortuous course in the superficial fascia of the scalp.
Its branches in the region are (a) mastoid, (b) meningeal, 
and (c) muscular.
Arterial anastomosis around semispinalis capitis muscle
One of the muscular branches is biggest—the descending 
branch, which divides into superficial and deep branches.
The superficial branch anastomoses with the superficial 
branch of the transverse cervical artery superficial to the 
semispinalis capitis. The deep branch anastomoses with deep 
cervical artery, a branch of costocervical trunk deep to the 
semispinalis capitis.
Thus, this arterial anastomosis around the semispinalis 
capitis is between external carotid artery (via occipital artery) 
and subclavian artery (via transverse cervical and costocervi-
cal trunk).
Third part of the vertebral artery
The third part of the vertebral artery appears in the 
suboccipital triangle through foramen transversarium of the 
atlas vertebra. After emerging from the foramen, the artery 
winds backwards and medially behind the lateral mass of the 
atlas; lodges in a groove on the upper surface of its posterior 
arch, and finally leaves the triangle by passing deep to the 
thick lateral edge of the posterior atlanto-occipital membrane 
(oblique ligament of atlas) to enter the vertebral canal where 
it continues as the fourth part of the vertebral artery.
The vertebral artery is separated from the posterior arch 
of the atlas by the 1st cervical nerve and its dorsal and ventral 
rami.
The tortuous course of the third part of the vertebral artery 
in this region may serve to damp down the arterial pulsations 
within the cranial cavity.
But if it is affected by atheroma, movements of the head 
and neck may affect the flow of blood through it and cause 
temporary fainting or unconsciousness.
Clinical correlation
First cervical nerve: The 1st cervical nerve while passing 
behind the lateral mass of atlas divides into dorsal and 
ventral rami (Fig. 7.10):
1. The dorsal ramus (also called suboccipital nerve)
emerges backwards between the vertebral artery and 
the posterior arch of the atlas and soon breaks up into 
five muscular branches to supply four suboccipital 
muscles (rectus capitis posterior major, rectus capitis 
posterior minor, obliquus capitis superior, and
--- Page 118 ---
Back of the Neck and Cervical Spinal Column
obliquus capitis inferior) and semispinalis capitis. The 
branch to inferior oblique joins the greater occipital 
nerve. It usually does not give any cutaneous branch 
(cf. unlike other spinal nerves, the 1st cervical spinal 
nerve has no sensory root).
2. The ventral ramus winds forwards around the lateral 
mass and lies medial or deep to the artery. It then 
descends in front of the root of the transverse process of 
the atlas between rectus capitis lateralis and rectus 
capitis anterior, which it supplies. Thereafter, it joins the 
ventral ramus of C2 to take part in the formation of 
cervical plexus.
CERVICAL SPINAL COLUMN 
AND JOINTS OF THE NECK
The cervical spinal column (Fig. 7.11) is generally referred 
to as cervical spine by the clinicians. It consists of 7 
cervical vertebrae and the intervening intervertebral discs. 
It is convex anteriorly. The cervical spine is a bony pillar 
of the neck, which supports the skull and transmits the 
weight. Within its cavity lies the spinal cord, roots of 
spinal nerves, and covering meninges to which it provides 
protection. Because it is segmented, being made up of 
vertebrae and pads of fibrocartilage (intervertebral discs), 
it is a flexible structure and responsible for the mobility of 
the neck.
Most of the problems on the back of the neck are due to 
involvement of cervical vertebrae and their joints. Therefore, 
it is very important for medical students to understand the 
anatomy of cervical spinal column in detail (also see the 
chapter on vertebral column in, General Anatomy by 
Vishram Singh).
CERVICAL VERTEBRAE
Cervical vertebrae (Fig. 7.11) are seven in number and 
numbered from above downwards. They are characterized 
by the presence of foramen in each of their transverse 
processes called foramen transversarium. It transmits 
vertebral artery (Fig. 7.12), except for 7th cervical vertebra. 
First cervical vertebra is called atlas and the skull rests on it. 
Fig. 7.10 Relationship of the third part of vertebral artery 
and first cervical nerve to the atlas vertebral as seen from 
the superior aspect.
Third part of
vertebral artery
Dorsal
ramus of C1
First cervical nerve
Foramen
transversarium
Ventral
ramus of C1
Superior articular
facet of atlas
Posterior arch of
atlas vertebra
Spine of
axis vertebra
Spine of 7th cervical
vertebra (vertebra
prominens)
Intervertebral
discs
Posterior arch of
atlas vertebra
Spine of
axis vertebra
Spine of 7th cervical
vertebra (vertebra
prominens)
Intervertebral
discs
Bodies of
vertebrae
Fig. 7.11 Cervical vertebral column: A, schematic diagram; B, lateral radiograph.
--- Page 119 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
It is named after mythological Greek Titan who was reputed 
to support the heavens on his shoulders. The 2nd cervical 
vertebra is called axis, because its odontoid process forms a 
pivot around which atlas rotates and carries the skull. The 
atlas and axis are specialized vertebrae. The atlas has neither 
body nor spine. It is ring-like and consists of two lateral 
masses, connected by a short anterior arch and long 
posterior arch (Fig. 2.29B). The axis possesses, tooth-like 
odontoid process which projects upwards from the body. 
The 3rd–6th cervical vertebrae are regarded as typical 
vertebrae. The cervical vertebrae are described in detail in 
Chapter 2.
JOINTS OF THE NECK 
The joints of the neck include intervertebral joints between 
the lower 6 cervical vertebrae and craniovertebral joints. The 
joints between the lower 6 cervical vertebrae are typical 
cervical joints. These are similar to those in the other parts of 
the vertebral column. They permit flexion, extension, and 
lateral bending but little rotation. The joints between 1st and 
2nd cervical vertebrae and those between 1st cervical 
vertebrae and skull permit rotation and nodding of head, 
respectively. The joints of neck are clinically important due 
to high incidence of spondylosis, disc prolapse, and fracture 
dislocation in the cervical region.
TYPICAL CERVICAL JOINTS
These are the joints between lower 6 cervical vertebrae.
They include joints between the vertebral bodies, 
vertebral arches, and vertebral articular processes.
Joints Between the Vertebral Bodies
They are of two types, viz.
1. Secondary cartilaginous (intervertebral disc) between 
the bodies of adjacent vertebrae.
2. Synovial (joints of Luschka), between the lateral margins 
of the bodies of adjacent vertebrae.
Secondary Cartilaginous Joints (Fig. 7.13)
These are articulations between two bodies of adjacent 
vertebrae from 2nd to 7th cervical vertebrae.
The adjacent articular surfaces are covered by the plates of 
hyaline cartilage and held together by an intervertebral disc.
The disc is fibrocartilaginous in nature. It consists of 
an outer part formed by a series of fibrocartilaginous 
laminae called annulus fibrosus and an inner part 
consisting of jelly-like material called nucleus pulposus.
The most peripheral laminae of annulus fibrosus are 
formed of pure collagenous tissue and on the front and on 
the back they blend with strong anterior and the weak 
posterior longitudinal ligaments. The discs are firmly 
bound to the edges of the hyaline cartilages and bodies of 
the vertebrae. The intervertebral discs are thick anteriorly 
in the cervical region contributing to the anterior 
convexity of the neck. No discs are found between the first 
two cervical vertebrae.
The intervertebral disc along with hyaline cartilage 
covering the upper and lower articular surfaces of the 
adjoining vertebral bodies form the intervertebral symphysis.
Ligaments
Anterior longitudinal ligament (Fig. 7.14): It extends 
anterior to the anterior arch of atlas and bodies of remaining 
cervical vertebrae. It is a strong ligament and consists of long 
and short fibres. The long fibres are superficial and bridge 
across several vertebrae whereas short fibres are deep and 
bridge across a single pair of vertebrae, and blend with the 
annulus fibrous of the intervertebral disc.
Fig. 7.13 Secondary cartilaginous joints (symphyses) 
between the vertebral bodies.
Ventral ramus of
cervical spinal nerve
Raised lip of upper
surface of the body
Facet for 
joint of Luschka
Foramen
transversarium
containing
vertebral artery
Superior
articular facet
Fig. 7.12 Typical cervical vertebra (superior aspect). 
Annulus fibrosus
Vertebral bodies
Nucleus pulposus
Plate of
hyaline cartilage
Intervertebral
discs
--- Page 120 ---
Back of the Neck and Cervical Spinal Column
Posterior longitudinal ligament (Fig. 7.15): It runs 
longitudinally across the posterior surfaces of the cervical 
vertebrae and hence situated within the vertebral canal. 
Above, it is attached to the body of C2 (axis) vertebra and 
continues above as membrana tectoria. It is fairly wide 
where it is attached to the intervertebral discs but narrow 
over the bodies. It is loosely attached to the bodies to 
provide space for basivertebral veins and paravertebral 
venous plexus.
It is weaker than anterior longitudinal ligament. Its 
superficial long fibres bridge across three or four vertebrae 
whereas its short deep fibres extend between adjacent 
vertebrae as perivertebral ligaments and are attached to 
annulus fibrous of the disc.
Prolapse of intervertebral disc in the cervical region: It 
usually involves the disc between C5 and C6 or C6 and C7. 
The nucleus pulposus generally herniates in the postero-
lateral direction and compresses a nerve root. The herniated 
disc between C5 and C6 compresses C6 nerve root, hence 
patient feels pain in the thumb, whereas herniated disc 
between C6 and C7 compresses C7 nerve root and 
consequently there is pain, tingling and numbness on the 
posterior aspect of arm, forearm, and middle and index 
fingers. 
Clinical correlation
Joints of Luschka (also called uncovertebral joints)
The lateral margins of vertebral bodies overlap the sides of 
intervertebral disc and directly articulate to form small 
synovial joints of plane variety called joints of Luschka.
Cervical spondylosis: It is the most common clinical 
condition affecting the neck. Degenerative changes appear 
in the cervical spine, often during the third or fourth decade. 
The disc space between the 5th and 6th cervical vertebrae 
is most frequently affected. The earliest changes are 
confined to the intervertebral disc but the facet joints and 
uncovertebral joints (joints of Luschka) get involved soon.
The joints of Luschka are the commonest sites of 
formation of osteophytes. Since cervical nerve roots lie 
posterolateral to these joints, they are often compressed by 
the osteophytes leading to pain along their distribution. The 
foramina transversaria containing vertebral artery lie lateral 
to these joints, hence osteophytes can also cause distortion 
of vertebral artery leading to vertebrobasilar insufficiency 
which clinically presents as dizziness and allied symptoms 
following jerky neck movements.
Clinical correlation
Joints Between the Vertebral Arches
Joints between the vertebral arches include:
1. Joints between the articular processes of vertebrae 
(zygapophyseal joints).
2. Intervertebral syndesmoses between laminae, spines, 
and transverse processes.
Zygapophyseal Joints (also called facet joints)
These are joints between the superior and inferior articular 
processes of adjacent vertebrae (Fig. 7.16).
Type
These are synovial joints of plane variety. The articular 
surfaces are covered by hyaline cartilage.
The articular surfaces are inclined horizontally and slope 
inferiorly from anterior to posterior. This allows rotation of 
neck to look sideways and upwards.
Fig. 7.14 Anterior longitudinal ligament.
Fig. 7.15 Posterior longitudinal ligament.
Anterior
longitudinal
ligament
Intervertebral disc
Vertebral body
Cut pedicles
Intervertebral disc
Posterior
longitudinal
ligament
--- Page 121 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
Fig. 7.16 Zygapophyseal joints between the superior and 
inferior articular processes of adjacent vertebrae.
Ligaments
Fibrous capsule: It is thin and loose, and attached to the 
periphery of articular facets.
Movements
Permits side-to-side rotation of the neck.
Dislocation of vertebrae without fracture: It occurs only 
in cervical region because of the inclination of the articular 
surfaces of articular processes. In thoracic and lumbar 
regions, dislocations are always associated with fracture of 
articular processes.
The dislocations mostly occur between 4th and 5th or 
between 5th and 6th cervical vertebrae.
Clinical correlation
Intervertebral Syndesmoses
Between the adjacent laminae (Fig. 7.17): Ligamenta flava
connect the laminae of adjacent vertebrae. They extend from 
lower border of lamina above to the upper border of the 
lamina below in the vertebral canal. They are predominantly 
made up of yellow elastic tissue.
The ligamenta flava prevent the separation of laminae in 
spinal flexion and help to restore the erect posture after 
flexion thus protecting the disc from the injury.
Between the adjacent spines: Interspinous ligament 
connects the adjacent spines and supraspinous ligaments
connect the tips of spinous processes.
Between the adjacent transverse processes: 
intertransverse ligaments connect the adjacent transverse 
processes. They are very weak in cervical region and largely 
replaced by intertransverse muscles.
Nerve Supply of the Intervertebral Joints
All intervertebral joints are innervated by adjoining spinal 
nerves, particularly by their posterior divisions.
Movements of the Cervical Spinal Column
Movements of cervical spinal column include:
1. Flexion.
2. Extension.
3. Lateral flexion.
4. Rotation.
Flexion is forward whereas extension is a backward movement. 
Both these movements have extensive range of motion.
Lateral flexion is the bending of the neck to one or the 
other side with extensive range of motion.
Rotation is a twisting movement with greater degree of 
freedom.
Circumduction 
combination 
aforementioned movements.
N.B. All these movements are enhanced by movements 
occurring at craniovertebral joints.
CRANIOVERTEBRAL JOINTS
These articulations take place between occipital condyles, 
atlas, and axis (Fig. 7.18).
All these articulations together act as a universal joint, 
permitting horizontal and vertical scanning movements of 
the head, superbly adapted for eye and head coordination.
The craniovertebral joints include:
1. Atlanto-occipital joints.
2. Atlantoaxial joints.
Atlanto-occipital Joints (Fig. 7.18)
These are two atlanto-occipital joints, one on either side 
between the atlas vertebra and occipital bone.
Type
These are synovial joints of ellipsoidal variety.
Articular surfaces
Above: Convex articular surface of occipital condyles.
Zygapophyseal joints
(facet joints)
Intervertebral joint
Ligamentum
flavum
Laminae of
vertebrae
Blends with capsule of
zygapophyseal joint
Space between the
ligamenta flava
Fig. 7.17 Ligamenta flava (anterior aspect).
--- Page 122 ---
Back of the Neck and Cervical Spinal Column
Below: Concave superior articular facets of the atlas (cervical 
vertebra). They are elongated and kidney shaped with the 
constrictions in the middle. They are directed medially and 
forward. Thus the superior and inferior articular surfaces are 
reciprocally curved.
Ligaments
1. Fibrous capsule (capsular ligament): It surrounds 
the joint and is attached to the margins of the 
articular surfaces. It is thick posterolaterally and thin 
posteromedially.
2. Accessory ligaments
(a) Anterior atlanto-occipital membrane
It is attached below to the anterior arch of the 
atlas and above to the anterior margin of the 
foramen magnum.
It fuses with the fibrous capsule laterally and is 
strengthened by cord-like anterior longitudinal 
ligament anteriorly.
(b) Posterior atlanto-occipital membrane
It is attached below to the upper border of the 
posterior arch of the atlas and above to the 
posterior margin of the foramen magnum. 
Inferolaterally it arches over a groove on the 
upper surface of the posterior arch of atlas for 
vertebral artery and 1st cervical nerve.
Arterial supply
By vertebral artery.
Nerve supply
By 1st cervical nerve.
Movements
Since these are ellipsoid joints, the movements are permitted 
in transverse as well as in anteroposterior axes. The 
movements are listed in Table 7.2.
Table 7.2 Movements occurring at atlanto-occipital joints
Movement
Axis
Muscles responsible for 
movements
Flexion and 
extension 
(nodding or
movements)
Transverse
Flexion by: longus capitis 
and rectus capitis anterior
Extension by:
(a) Rectus capitis posterior 
major and minor
(b) Semispinalis capitis
(c) Splenius capitis
(d) Upper part of the 
trapezius
Lateral flexion 
(slight)
Anteroposterior
Rectus capitis lateralis
The line of gravity of the weight of the head (about 7 lbs) 
passes in front of the atlanto-occipital joints. Therefore, 
position of head in erect position is maintained by the 
traction caused by the extensor muscles, particularly by 
semispinalis capitis. Thus semispinalis muscle is responsible 
for keeping the head in proper position (Fig. 7.6).
Clinical correlation
Atlantoaxial Joints
Three well-separated joints are formed between the atlas and 
the axis, viz.
1. Median atlantoaxial joint.
2. Two lateral atlantoaxial joints.
N.B. All these joints function as one unit to produce the 
movement of rotation of atlas with head around the vertical 
axis.
Median Atlantoaxial Joint (Fig. 7.19)
Type
It is a synovial joint of pivot variety. It is formed between the 
dens of axis and osseoligamentous ring formed by anterior 
arch and transverse ligament of the atlas.
Articular surfaces
1. Odontoid process of axis.
2. Anterior arch and transverse ligament of atlas.
There are two articulations—anterior and posterior—with 
separate synovial cavities.
Anteriorly, the vertically oriented oval facet on the 
anterior surface of dens articulates with a similar facet on the 
posterior surface of the anterior arch of the atlas.
Posteriorly, the cartilaginous anterior surface of transverse 
ligament of atlas articulates with the horizontally oriented 
ovoid facet on the posterior surface of the base of the dense.
Fig. 7.18 Posterior view of the ligaments connecting the 
axis with occipital bone. The superior band of cruciform 
ligament is cut.
Membrana
tectoria
Superior longitudinal
band of cruciform ligament
Apical ligament of dens
Alar ligament
Occipital condyle
Lateral mass of
atlas
Inferior longitudinal
band of cruciform
ligament
Posterior longitudinal
ligament
Axis vertebra
Convex articular
surface of occipital
condyle
Concave superior
articular facet of
atlas
Atlanto-occipital
joint
--- Page 123 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
Ligaments
1. Fibrous capsule: It is loose and surrounds the anterior 
joint. It is attached around the margins of the articular 
facets. It is lined by synovial membrane.
2. Transverse ligament: It is attached on each side to the 
medial surface of the lateral mass of the atlas. In the 
median plane its fibres are prolonged: (a) upwards to the 
basiocciput and (b) downwards to the body of the axis, 
thus forming the cruciform ligament of the atlas. The 
transverse ligament embraces the narrow neck of the 
dens and prevents its backward dislocation. A synovial 
bursa is interposed between the transverse ligament and 
dens. It is said to be the large posterior part of the 
median atlantoaxial joint.
3. Ligaments connecting the axis with the occipital bone
(a) Apical ligament of the dens (Fig. 7.20) extends from 
tip of odontoid process to the upper surface of the 
basilar part of the occipital bone near the foramen 
magnum.
Morphologically it represents the remnant of the 
notochord (cf. Nucleus pulposus).
(b) Alar ligaments, one on each side, extend from the 
upper part of the dens (on side of the tip) to the 
tubercle on the medial aspect of the occipital 
condyle. These ligaments are very strong and check 
excessive rotation and flexion of head. They are, 
therefore, called check ligaments.
(c) Membrana tectoria (Fig. 7.20) is an upward 
continuation of the posterior longitudinal ligament. 
It lies posterior to the transverse ligament of the 
atlas. Inferiorly, it is attached to the posterior surface 
of the body of the axis and superiorly to the upper 
surface of the basilar part of the occipital bone 
above the attachment of upper band of the 
cruciform ligament.
(d) Cruciform or cruciate ligament (see transverse 
ligament).
Lateral Atlantoaxial Joints
These are paired, one on each side.
Type
Synovial joint of plane variety.
Articular surfaces
Above: Inferior facet of the lateral mass of the atlas. It is flat.
Below: Superior articular facet of axis. It is also flat, thus 
superior and inferior articular facets are reciprocally curved.
Capsules: It is attached to the margin of articular surfaces. 
It is supported by anterior longitudinal ligament and 
ligamentum flavum.
Fig. 7.19 Median atlantoaxial articulation.
Fig. 7.21 Hangman’s fracture.
Fig. 7.20 Median sagittal section through the foramen 
magnum and 1st–3rd cervical vertebrae.
Membrana tectoria
Basilar part of
occipital bone
Anterior atlanto-
occipital membrane
Apical ligament of dens
Anterior arch of atlas
Remains of
intervertebral disc
Anterior longitudinal
ligament
Superior longitudinal band of
cruciform ligament
Transverse ligament of atlas
Posterior atlanto-
occipital membrane
Posterior arch of
atlas
Interior longitudinal
band of cruciform
ligament
Posterior
longitudinal
ligament
Odontoid process
Fracture of
pedicle
Dens (odontoid
process) of axis
Anterior arch
of atlas
Facet for dens
Synovial cavities
Cartilaginous anterior
surface of transverse
ligament
Transverse ligament
of atlas
--- Page 124 ---
Back of the Neck and Cervical Spinal Column
Fig. 7.22 Executive hanging: A, hanging; B, fracture of 
odontoid process; C, rupture of transverse ligament of 
atlas.
Movements
These are simultaneous at all the three atlantoaxial joints and 
consist almost exclusively of rotation of axis. In fact, the 
osseoligamentous ring of atlas supporting the atlas rotates 
around the central pivot formed by the odontoid process. 
The rotation is limited mainly by alar ligaments. Rotatory 
movements of atlas with head, around vertical axis are also 
called No movements.
• Hangman’s fracture (Fig. 7.21): It is characterized by the 
fracture of the pedicles of the axis vertebra. It is a severe 
extension injury of the neck that occurs from automobile 
accident or a fall from height. Since in this injury the 
vertebral canal is enlarged due to forward displacement of 
the body of axis, the spinal cord is rarely compressed.
This injury is so named because during execution by 
hanging, the knot of Hangman’s rope beneath the chin 
causes sudden severe extension injury of the neck.
Executive hanging can also cause fracture of odontoid 
process or separation of axis from the 3rd cervical 
vertebrae.
• The fractures of odontoid process of axis vertebra are 
relatively common, and usually occurs due to fall or blow 
on the head. Excessive mobility of the fractured odontoid 
process, particularly if associated with rupture of 
transverse ligament of atlas can cause compression of 
the spinal cord (Fig. 7.22) .
Clinical correlation
N.B. In executing hanging, death occurs due to posterior 
dislocation of odontoid process (following rupture of 
transverse ligament of atlas) crushing the lower part of 
medulla oblongata which houses vital centres and adjoining 
part of the spinal cord.
Fracture of
odontoid
process
Rupture of
transverse
ligament of
atlas
Odontoid process
--- Page 125 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
Golden Facts to Remember
  Spinous process of cervical vertebra, which can be 
readily palpated on the back of the neck
Spinous process of C7 vertebra (vertebra 
prominence)
  Cervical vertebra with thickest spinous process
Second cervical (axis) vertebra
  Largest superficial muscle on the back of the neck
Trapezius muscle
  Widest cervical vertebra
1st cervical vertebra
  Thickest cutaneous nerve in the body
Greater occipital nerve (dorsal ramus of C1 spinal 
nerve)
  Rounded ridge at the side of the median furrow 
on the back of the neck is produced by 
Semispinalis capitis (although it lies deep to 
trapezius and splenius
  Intervertebral disc commonly involved in disc 
prolapse in cervical region
Intervertebral disc between C5/C6 and C6/C7
  Hangman’s fracture
Fracture of the pedicles of 2nd cervical (axis) 
vertebra
  No movements occur at
Median atlantoaxial joint of pivot variety
  Yes movements occur at
Atlanto-occipital joints of ellipsoid variety
  Dislocation without fracture occurs only in cervical 
region because
The articular surfaces of articular processes are 
inclined horizontally
A 59-year-old man visited his family physician and 
complained that he was suffering from pain on the 
back of his neck and over the lower part of deltoid 
region and lateral side of his arm on the right side. 
Sometimes he also felt tingling and numbness along 
the lateral aspect of his arm, forearm and thumb. The 
X-ray of cervical spine revealed reduced disc space 
between C4/C5 and C5/C6 vertebrae. The extensive 
formation of osteophytes (bony spurs) were also seen 
on the side of bodies of 4th, 5th, and 6th cervical 
vertebrae. He was told that he was suffering from 
cervical spondylosis.
Questions
1. What is cervical spondylosis?
2. Mention cause of pain, tingling, and numbness.
3. Name the discs commonly involved in cervical 
spondylosis.
Answers
1. Degenerative changes involving intervertebral 
discs, facet and uncovertebral joints (refer to page 
105 for details).
2. Compression of C5 and C6 nerve roots.
3. Discs between C4/C5 and C5/C6 vertebrae.
Clinical Case Study
--- Page 126 ---
Parotid Region
CHAPTER
The parotid region is the area around the ear, bounded 
anteriorly by anterior border of masseter, superiorly by the 
zygomatic arch, posteriorly by mastoid process, and 
inferiorly by line joining the angle of the mandible to the 
mastoid process.
The principal structures in this area are parotid gland and
facial nerve.
The facial nerve comes out of the cranial cavity through 
the stylomastoid foramen in this region and enters the 
parotid gland, where it divides into five terminal branches 
which emerge on the face, underneath the anterior margin of 
the parotid gland (Fig. 8.1).
The detailed knowledge of the anatomy of parotid 
region is important in clinical practice particularly while 
performing surgical procedures on parotid gland.
PAROTID GLAND
The parotid (para = around, otic = ear) gland is the largest of 
the three pairs of salivary glands, viz. parotid, submandibular, 
and sublingual. It is composed almost entirely of serous 
alveoli. It is lobulated, yellowish brown, and weighs about 
25 g.
LOCATION
The parotid gland lies in the pyramidal fossa, posterior to the 
ramus of the mandible called retromandibular fossa (parotid 
bed).
Boundaries of the Parotid Bed (Fig. 8.2)
It is bounded:
Anteriorly: 
 by the posterior border of the ramus of mandible.
Posteriorly: by the mastoid process.
Superiorly: by the external acoustic meatus and posterior 
part of temporomandibular joint.
Medially: 
by styloid process.
The parotid bed is lined by muscles, probably to make it 
soft as under:
1. Ramus of the mandible is covered by two muscles: 
masseter laterally and the medial pterygoid medially.
2. Mastoid 
process 
covered 
muscles: 
sternocleidomastoid laterally and posterior belly of 
digastric muscle medially.
3. Styloid process is enveloped by three slender muscles: 
styloglossus, stylopharyngeus, and stylohyoid.
Fig. 8.1 Main features of the parotid region.
External acoustic
meatus
Mastoid process
Sternocleidomastoid
muscle
Facial nerve
Parotid gland
Diagastric
muscle
Masseter
Parotid
duct
Zygomatic arch
Fig. 8.2 Parotid bed and location of the parotid gland.
Posterior belly of
digastric muscle
Parotid
duct
Accessory
parotid
gland
Posterior border of
ramus of mandible
Temporomandibular
joint
External
acoustic meatus
Styloid
process with
attached muscles
Sternocleidomastoid
muscle
--- Page 127 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
The parotid gland is too soft to be palpable in healthy 
individual but one can identify the bony boundaries of the 
parotid bed.
Extent 
The parotid gland being soft is not confined only to the 
parotid bed but extends beyond it. The extent of parotid 
gland is as follows: it extends from external auditory meatus 
above, to the upper part of the carotid triangle below;
medially it extends to the styloid process (close to the side 
wall of pharynx) and wraps around the neck of the mandible. 
Posteriorly it overlaps the sternocleidomastoid muscle and 
anteriorly it extends over the masseter for a variable distance. 
A part of this forward extension is often detached from the 
rest of the gland and is known as accessory parotid gland.
The accessory parotid gland lies between the zygomatic arch 
above and the parotid duct below (Fig. 8.5). Several ducts 
from accessory gland open into the parotid duct.
PAROTID CAPSULE (OR PAROTID SHEATH) 
The parotid gland is enclosed in a fibrous capsule called 
parotid capsule (Fig. 8.3).
It is formed by the tough investing layer of deep cervical 
fascia. This fascia splits in the region between the angle of the 
mandible and mastoid process to enclose the gland. The 
superficial lamina is thick, strong, unyielding, and adherent 
to the gland while deep lamina is thin. The superficial lamina 
blends with the epimysium of masseter to form a thick 
parotidomasseteric fascia, which is attached above to the 
zygomatic arch. The thin deep lamina is attached to the 
tympanic plate and styloid process of the temporal bone; it 
thickens to form stylomandibular ligament, which separates 
the parotid gland from the submandibular gland.
Infection of the parotid gland. The parotid gland is 
commonly infected by the mumps virus causing inflammation 
and swelling of the gland (mumps).
The parotid swellings are very painful due to unyielding 
nature of the parotid capsule, any inflammation or tension 
within the parotid gland will cause severe pain. This is 
caused by the stretching of the capsule and stimulation of 
branches of great auricular nerve. The pain is usually 
exacerbated at meal time when gustatory stimulus to gland 
results in increased parotid secretion enhancing further 
turgor within the capsule. However, patient is relieved of 
pain to some extent after taking meals due to release of 
secretions. This is seen routinely in patients suffering from 
mumps (also see Clinical correlation on page 117).
Clinical correlation
EXTERNAL FEATURES (Figs 8.4 and 8.5)
The gland resembles a three-sided pyramid with apex 
directed downwards. It presents the following features:
Fig. 8.3 Parotid capsule.
Tympanic plate
Zygomatic arch
Superficial lamina of
parotid fascia
(Parotidomasseteric
fascia)
Investing layer of 
deep cervical fascia
Styloid process
Stylomandibular
ligament
Deep lamina of
parotid fascia
Fig. 8.4 Horizontal section through parotid gland showing its relations and the structures passing through it. The inset figure 
shows borders and surfaces of the parotid gland (SG = styloglossus muscle, SH = stylohyoid muscle, SP = stylopharyngeus 
muscle).
Skin
Deep cervical fascia
Parotid lymph
nodes
Platysma
Anterior border
Masseter
Ramus of mandible
Medial
pterygoid
External carotid artery
Retromandibular vein
Medial border
Pharyngeal wall
Internal carotid artery
Internal jugular vein
Styloid process
Mastoid process
Sternocleidomastoid
Facial nerve
Posterior border
Posterior belly of
digastric
Branches of
great auricular nerve
Superficial surface
Anterior border
Anteromedial
surface
Medial border
Posteromedial
surface
Posterior border
--- Page 128 ---
Parotid Region
 An apex
 Four surfaces
(a) Superior surface or base.
(b) Superficial surface.
(c) Anteromedial surface.
(d) Posteromedial surface.
 Three borders
(a) Anterior.
(b) Posterior.
(c) Medial.
RELATIONS
Apex
It projects downwards overlapping the posterior belly of 
digastric muscle and adjoining part of the carotid triangle.
The structures emerging through the apex include (Fig. 8.5):
1. Cervical branch of the facial nerve.
Anterior and posterior divisions of retromandibular vein.
Superior Surface or Base
It is concave and related to the external acoustic meatus and 
posterior aspect of temporomandibular joint.
The following structures emerge through it (Fig. 8.5):
1. Superficial temporal vessels.
2. Auriculotemporal nerve.
Superficial Surface
It is the largest of the four surfaces. It is covered from 
superficial to deep by (Fig. 8.4):
1. Skin.
2. Superficial fascia containing anterior branches of greater 
auricular nerve, superficial parotid (preauricular) lymph 
nodes, and platysma.
3. Parotid fascia.
4. Deep parotid lymph nodes embedded in the gland.
Anteromedial Surface
It is deeply grooved by the posterior border of the ramus of 
the mandible. It is related to (Fig. 8.4):
1. Masseter.
2. Medial pterygoid.
3. Posterior border of the ramus of the mandible.
4. Lateral aspect of the temporomandibular joint.
The branches of facial nerve emerge on face from 
underneath the anterior margin of this surface (Fig. 8.5).
Posteromedial Surface
It is moulded onto the mastoid and styloid processes and 
their covering muscles. Thus it is related to (Fig. 8.4):
1. Mastoid process, sternocleidomastoid, and posterior 
belly of digastric.
2. Styloid process and styloid group of muscles.
The styloid process and its muscles separate the gland 
from internal carotid artery, internal jugular vein, and last 
four cranial nerves.
The following structures enter the gland through this 
surface:
1. Facial nerve trunk in its upper part.
2. External carotid artery in its lower part.
Anterior Border
It separates the superficial surface from the anteromedial 
surface. The following structures (from above downwards) 
emerge in a radiating fashion underneath this border 
(Fig. 8.5):
 1. Temporal branch of the facial nerve.
Above the 
parotid duct
2. Zygomatic branch of the facial nerve.
3. Transverse facial vessels.
4. Upper buccal branch of the facial nerve.
5. Parotid duct.
6. Lower buccal branch of the facial nerve.
Below the 
parotid duct
7. Marginal mandibular branch of the 
facial nerve.
Posterior
auricular
nerve and
vessels
External acoustic
meatus
Auriculotemporal
nerve
Superficial temporal artery
Superficial temporal vein
Temporal branch of
facial nerve
Transverse facial
artery
Zygomatic branch of
facial nerve
Upper buccal
branch of
facial nerve
Parotid duct
Accessory parotid
gland
Lower buccal
branch of
facial nerve
Marginal mandibular
branch of facial nerve
Cervical branch of facial nerve
Posterior
Anterior
Divisions of retromandibular vein
VA N
Fig. 8.5 The structures emerging at the periphery of the 
parotid gland.
--- Page 129 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
Posterior Border
It separates the superficial surface from the posteromedial 
surface.
The following structures emerge underneath this border 
(Fig. 8.5):
1. Posterior auricular vessels.
2. Posterior auricular branch of the facial nerve.
Medial Border
It separates the anteromedial surface from the posteromedial 
surface. It is related to the lateral wall of the pharynx.
STRUCTURES PRESENT WITHIN THE PAROTID GLAND
Three main structures either in part or in whole traverse the 
gland and branch within it (Figs 8.4 and 8.6). From super-
ficial to deep these are:
1. Facial nerve.
2. Retromandibular vein.
3. External carotid artery.
N.B. Some members of the deep parotid lymph nodes and 
filaments of auriculotemporal nerve are also located within 
the gland.
The facial nerve (Fig. 8.6A) is most superficial. It enters 
the gland through the upper part of the posteromedial 
surface and divides into its terminal branches within the 
gland. The branches run horizontally and leave the gland 
through its anteromedial surface and appear on the face by 
passing underneath its anterior border.
The five terminal branches of the facial nerve radiate like 
a goose-foot through the anterior border of the gland and 
supply the muscles of facial expression. Such branching 
pattern of the facial nerve is termed pes anserinus.
Fig. 8.6 The structures traversing the parotid gland: A, facial nerve; B, retromandibular vein; C, external carotid artery.
Cervical branch
Cervicofacial
trunk
Marginal mandibular branch
Upper
buccal
Lower
buccal
Zygomatic branch
Temporal branch
Temporofacial
trunk
Facial nerve
trunk
Branches
Posterior
auricular artery
External carotid artery
Maxillary artery
Transverse facial artery
Superficial temporal artery
Superficial temporal
vein
Transverse facial
vein
Maxillary vein
Anterior division
Facial vein
Common facial vein
External
jugular vein
Posterior
auricular vein
Posterior
division
Retromandibular
vein
--- Page 130 ---
Parotid Region
The retromandibular vein (Fig. 8.6B) occupies the 
intermediate zone of the gland and is formed by the union of 
the superficial temporal and maxillary veins. It ends below 
by dividing into anterior and posterior divisions. The 
anterior division joins the facial vein to form the common 
facial vein while posterior division joins the posterior 
auricular vein to form the external jugular vein.
The external carotid artery (Fig. 8.6C) pierces the lower 
part of the posteromedial surface to enter the gland where it 
occupies the deep zone of the gland. Within the gland it 
divides into superficial temporal and maxillary arteries. The 
transverse facial artery, branch of superficial temporal artery 
emerges through the anterior border of the gland.
Patey’s Faciovenous Plane (Fig. 8.7)
The parotid gland is divided into large superficial and small 
deep parts or lobes. These lobes are connected by the isthmus 
of the glandular tissue, so that the gland appears H-shaped 
(shaped like a collar stud) in coronal section. The branches of 
facial nerve passes forward through the isthmus. The plane 
between the superficial and deep lobes in which nerves and 
veins lie has been designated by Patey as faciovenous plane.
This plane helps the surgeons to remove the parotid tumor 
(see clinical correlation given below) without damaging the 
nerve.
Mixed parotid tumor: It is slow-growing lobulated painless 
tumor of large superficial part of the parotid gland. It is so 
called because of its mixed histological appearance. Currently 
it is termed pleomorphic adenoma. After many years of slow 
benign growth, it may undergo a malignant change.
Clinical correlation
Parotid Duct (Stenson’s Duct)
Parotid duct, about 5 cm long, emerges from the middle of 
the anterior border of the gland and opens into the vestibule 
of the mouth opposite the crown of upper second molar 
tooth (Fig. 8.8). 
Course
The course taken by the duct is as follows: After emerging 
from the gland, it runs forward over the masseter between 
the upper and lower buccal branches of the facial nerve; at 
the anterior border of masseter, it abruptly turns inwards, 
almost at 90° (first bend) and pierces buccal pad of fat, 
buccopharyngeal fascia, and buccinator muscle.
After piercing the buccinator muscle, the parotid duct 
runs forwards (second bend) for about 1 cm between it and 
Fig. 8.8 Sites of origin and termination of the parotid duct.
Fig. 8.9 Course of the parotid duct. Also note the structures 
pierced by it during its course from the parotid gland to the 
vestibule of the mouth.
Fig. 8.7 Patey’s faciovenous (neurovenous) plane in the 
parotid gland. The retromandibular vein is not shown for 
clarity: A, two lobes joined by an isthmus; B, superficial lobe 
is removed after dividing on isthmus leaving facial nerve and 
its branches intact.
Branches of
facial nerve
Isthmus
Superficial lobe
Deep lobe
Temporal branch
Zygomatic branch
Buccal branch
Divided isthmus
Marginal mandibular
branch
Cervical branch
Deep lobe
Cervicofacial
trunk
Facial
nerve trunk
Temporofacial
trunk
Mandible
Sternocleidomastoid
External
auditory
meatus
Parotid duct
Second upper
molar tooth
Ramus of
mandible
Masseter
Parotid gland
Parotid duct
Buccal pad of fat
Buccopharyngeal
fascia
Buccinator muscle
Mucous membrane
Parotid papilla
Structures pierced
by parotid duct
--- Page 131 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
the buccal mucosa. Finally, the duct turns medially 
(third bend) and opens into the vestibule of mouth opposite 
the crown of upper second molar teeth (Fig. 8.9). This 
tortuous course of the duct provides a valve-like mechanism 
to prevent the inflation of the duct system of parotid gland 
during excessive blowing of the mouth as in trumpet 
blowing.
Surface Anatomy of the Parotid Duct
On the face the parotid duct is represented by the middle 
third of the line extending from lower border of tragus to the 
midpoint between the ala of the nose and the red margin of 
the upper lip.
The accessory gland is drained by a small duct that opens 
into the upper aspect of the parotid duct.
• The probing of the parotid duct is difficult because of its 
tortuous course. The probe is held at the sharp bends of 
the duct.
• The parotid duct lies one finger’s breadth below the 
zygomatic arch, and when the teeth are clenched, it may 
be rolled up and down against the tense masseter.
• The parotid duct being a superficial structure on the face, 
may be damaged in injuries to the face or may be cut 
inadvertently during surgical procedures on the face.
• The parotid duct and its ramifications can be demonstrated 
radiologically by injecting radio-opaque dye through a 
fine needle or canula inserted into the mouth of the duct 
in the vestibule of the oral cavity (parotid sialogram).
• Occasionally, calculi (stones) may form in the parotid 
gland and parotid duct. The calculi lodged in the distal 
portion of the gland may be removed by splitting up the 
duct from its opening in the mouth.
Clinical correlation
NERVE SUPPLY
The parotid gland is supplied by the parasympathetic, 
sympathetic, and sensory fibres:
1. Parasympathetic (secretomotor) supply (Fig. 13.10): It 
is provided through auriculotemporal nerve. The 
preganglionic fibres arise from the inferior salivatory 
nucleus in the medulla and pass successively through 
glossopharyngeal 
nerve, 
tympanic 
branch 
glossopharyngeal (Jacobson’s nerve), tympanic plexus 
and lesser petrosal nerve to relay into otic ganglion. 
Postganglionic fibres arise from the cells of the ganglion 
and pass through the auriculotemporal nerve to supply 
the parotid gland. The stimulation of parasympathetic 
supply produces watery secretion.
2. Sympathetic supply: It is derived from sympathetic 
plexus around external carotid artery formed by 
postganglionic fibres derived from superior cervical 
sympathetic ganglion. The preganglionic sympathetic 
fibres arise from the lateral horn of T1 spinal segment. 
The sympathetic fibres are vasomotor and their 
stimulation produces thick sticky secretion.
3. Sensory supply: It is derived from:
(a) Auriculotemporal nerve.
(b) Great auricular nerve (C2 and C3). The C2 fibres 
are sensory to the parotid fascia.
Frey’s syndrome (auriculotemporal nerve syndrome): 
Sometimes penetrating wounds of the parotid gland may 
damage auriculotemporal and great auricular nerves. 
The auriculotemporal nerve contains parasympathetic 
(secretomotor), sensory, and sympathetic fibres. The great 
auricular nerve contains sensory and sudomotor fibres. 
When these nerves are cut, during regeneration the 
secretomotor fibres grow into endoneurial sheaths of fibres 
supplying cutaneous receptors for pain, touch and 
temperature, and sympathetic fibres supplying sweat glands 
and blood vessels. Thus a stimulus intended for salivation 
evokes cutaneous hyperesthesia, sweating, and flushing. 
The presenting features of Frey’s syndrome are:
(a) When a person eats, the ipsilateral cheek (parotid 
region) becomes red, hot, and painful. It is associated 
with beads of perspiration (gustatory sweating).
(b) When 
person 
shaves, 
there 
cutaneous 
hyperesthesia in front of the ear.
Clinical correlation
VASCULAR SUPPLY
The arterial supply of parotid gland is derived from the 
external carotid and superficial temporal arteries.
The venous drainage of parotid gland takes place into 
retromandibular and external jugular veins.
LYMPHATIC DRAINAGE
The lymphatics from the parotid gland drain into the 
superficial and deep parotid lymph nodes, which in turn 
drain into deep cervical lymph nodes. The superficial 
parotid nodes lie in the superficial fascia over the gland and 
deep nodes, deep to parotid capsule. Few members of this 
group lie in the superficial zone of the parotid gland.
DEVELOPMENT
The parotid gland is ectodermal in origin. The parotid 
primordium develops during the 6th week of intrauterine 
life as a cord of cells by proliferation of ectodermal lining of 
the vestibule of the mouth near the angle of primitive oral 
fissure. It grows backwards towards the ear and branches 
repeatedly. The parotid bud and its branches canalize to 
form the duct system and acini.
--- Page 132 ---
Parotid Region
N.B. All the salivary glands arise from proliferation of the 
oral epithelium. Out of the three pairs of large salivary 
glands only parotid glands develop from ectoderm, others 
(submandibular and sublingual) develop from endoderm.
FACIAL NERVE: AN EXTRACRANIAL COURSE
The facial nerve (Fig. 8.10) comes out of cranial cavity 
through the stylomastoid foramen at the base of the skull, 
between the styloid and mastoid processes of the temporal 
bone.
After emerging from the foramen, it curves forwards 
around the lateral aspect of the root of the styloid process 
and enters the posteromedial aspect of the parotid gland on 
the superficial plane. In the gland, it runs superficial to the 
retromandibular vein for about 1 cm and then divides into 
two trunks: (a) the temporofacial, and (b) the cervicofacial. 
The temporofacial trunk runs upwards and subdivides into 
temporal and zygomatic terminal branches. The cervicofa-
cial trunk passes downwards and forwards, and divides into 
buccal, marginal mandibular, and cervical terminal branches.
BRANCHES
Below the base of the skull, the facial nerves give rise to the 
following branches:
1. Posterior auricular nerve: It arises just below the 
stylomastoid foramen and ascends between the mastoid 
process and the back of the external acoustic meatus. It 
supplies occipital belly of occipitofrontalis, auricularis 
posterior, and auricularis superior (intrinsic muscles of 
the ear).
2. Branch to the posterior belly of digastric: It arises near 
the origin of the previous nerve and after a very short 
course supplies the muscle. It also gives a branch to the 
stylohyoid muscle.
3. Terminal branches: These are five in number, viz.:
(a) Temporal branch—run upwards and cross the 
zygomatic arch.
(b) Zygomatic branches—run below and parallel to the 
zygomatic arch.
(c) Buccal branches—are two in number. The upper 
buccal nerve runs above the parotid duct and the 
lower buccal nerve runs below the duct.
(d) Marginal mandibular (also called mandibular) 
branch—runs forwards below the angle of the 
mandible, deep to the platysma. It then crosses the 
body of the mandible to supply the muscles of the 
lower lip and chin.
(e) Cervical branch—runs downwards and forwards to 
reach the front of the neck, to supply the platysma.
N.B. The terminal branches communicate with the sensory 
branches of the trigeminal nerve.
• Mumps (viral parotitis): It is a contagious disease 
caused by a specific virus called mumps virus (myxovirus). 
It presents as an acute inflammation and swelling of the 
gland. There is diffuse enlargement of the parotid gland 
(parotid swelling) associated with pain and fever. The 
pain is accentuated by jaw movement as the part of the 
gland between the external auditory meatus and 
temporomandibular joint is compressed. The opening of 
parotid duct becomes swollen and congested. It mostly 
affects children below 15 years of age. The viral parotitis 
characteristically does not suppurate. The viremia 
associated with mumps can cause complications in the 
adults like epididymo-orchitis, pancreatitis, or oophoritis, 
etc.
• Parotid abscess: The parotid abscess may occur by 
spread of infection from the oral cavity. A parotid abscess 
may spread into parapharyngeal spaces or burst 
spontaneously on the cheek or into the external auditory 
meatus.
• Drainage of the parotid abscess: A preauricular 
incision is made in the skin at the root of the auricle and 
skin flap raised to expose the parotid fascia. The abscess 
is drained by a blunt horizontal incision in the parotid 
capsule, parallel to the branches of the facial nerve 
(Hilton’s method).
• Bell’s palsy: It is described in detail on page 57.
Clinical correlation
Fig. 8.10 Extracranial course of the facial nerve (TF = 
temporofacial trunk, CF = cervicofacial trunk. T, Z, B, MM, 
and C = temporal, zygomatic, buccal, marginal mandibular, 
and cervical branches of the facial nerve).
Platysma
Facial nerve
Posterior
auricular
nerve
Occipital belly of
occipito-frontalis
Nerve to posterior
belly of digastric
Nerve to
stylohyoid
--- Page 133 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
Golden Facts to Remember
  Largest salivary gland in the body
Parotid gland
  Commonest cause of parotitis/commonest 
infection of the parotid gland
Mumps virus
  Most common tumor of the parotid gland
Pleomorphic adenoma (mixed parotid tumor)
  Ducts of all the major salivary glands open into 
the oral cavity proper except that of
Parotid gland (parotid duct) which opens in the 
vestibule of the mouth
  Most superficial structure within parotid gland
Facial nerve and its terminal branches
  Deepest structure in the substance of parotid 
gland
External carotid artery
  Most preferred incision to drain the parotid 
abscess
Horizontal incision in the parotid fascia (Hilton’s 
method)
A 14-year-old boy presented with a complaint of rapidly 
growing painful swelling on face in front of ear on the 
right side. He also told that the pain increases while 
taking meals but subsides to some extent after finishing 
the meal. On examination the physician found that the 
ear lobule is lifted on the affected side. The examination 
of oral cavity revealed congestion in mucous membrane 
of vestibule of mouth opposite the second upper molar 
tooth on the right side. He was diagnosed as a case of 
acute parotitis.
Questions
1. What is the commonest cause of acute parotitis?
2. Why parotid swellings are painful?
3. Why does pain increase during meal-time and is 
relieved after taking meals?
4. Name the three structures present within the 
substance of the parotid gland?
Answers
1. Mumps (infection of the parotid gland by mumps 
virus).
2. Due to stretching of tough unyielding parotid 
capsule which is richly innervated by sensory nerve 
fibres.
3. Pain increases while taking meal because during 
mastication secretion accumulates in the acini due 
to parasympathetic stimulation and a part of 
inflamed gland between temporomandibular joint 
and external acoustic meatus is compressed. The 
pain is relieved after meals because pent-up 
secretion (saliva) within the gland is released for 
salivation, hence reducing pressure on the parotid 
capsule.
4. Facial nerve, retromandibular vein, and external 
carotid artery.
Clinical Case Study
--- Page 134 ---
Submandibular Region
CHAPTER
The submandibular region is below and under the cover of 
the body of the mandible. It extends upwards up to the 
mylohyoid line and below up to the hyoid bone. Superficially 
it includes both submandibular and submental triangles 
(Fig. 9.1).
The deep structures in this region include floor of the 
mouth and the root of the tongue. Clinically this region is 
very important because it is the common site for swellings 
due to enlargement of submandibular lymph nodes and 
submandibular salivary gland. The inflammatory edema of 
the floor of the mouth (called Ludwig’s angina) spreads in 
this region to cause generalized swelling of the region. The 
surgical procedures are commonly performed in this region, 
hence students should study this region very carefully. The 
term submandibular often misleads the students as it gives 
the impression that the submandibular region deals with the 
structures below the mandible only.
SUPERFICIAL STRUCTURES IN THE
SUBMANDIBULAR REGION
The submandibular region is crossed superficially by 
platysma in the superficial fascia. Deep to platysma, the 
marginal mandibular nerve (lowest branch of facial 
nerve) crosses the lower border of the mandible near the 
angle and runs below it across the submandibular region 
before turning upwards to reach the mental region of the 
face where it supplies depressors of the lower lip (depressor 
labii inferioris, depressor anguli oris) and mentalis 
muscle. The surgical incisions are, therefore, not made 
along the lower border of the mandible to avoid injury to 
this nerve. The great auricular nerve crosses the posterior 
belly of digastric on its way to supply the skin of face and 
auricle (Fig. 9.1).
Fig. 9.1 Structures seen in the superficial dissection of the right submandibular region.
Mandible
Submental artery
Mylohyoid nerve and vessels
Mylohyoid muscle
Median fibrous raphe
Hyoid bone
Anterior belly of digastric
Submental lymph nodes
Marginal mandibular
branch of facial nerve
Hyoglossus
Stylohyoid
Common facial vein
Anterior division of retromandibular vein
Submandibular lymph nodes
Posterior belly of digastric
Great auricular nerve
Facial artery
Facial vein
--- Page 135 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
DEEP STRUCTURES IN THE 
SUBMANDIBULAR REGION
The deep structures in the submandibular region (also called 
contents of the submandibular region) are:
1. Suprahyoid muscles (all paired), viz. digastric, stylohyoid, 
mylohyoid, and geniohyoid.
2. Extrinsic muscles of the tongue (all paired), viz.
hyoglossus, styloglossus, and genioglossus.
3. Submandibular and sublingual salivary glands.
4. Facial and lingual arteries.
5. Lingual, hypoglossal, and glossopharyngeal nerves.
6. Submandibular ganglion.
N.B. It is important to know that on either side of midline, 
the submandibular salivary gland is the most prominent 
structure and the hyoglossus muscle is the key muscle of the 
submandibular region.
MUSCLES OF THE SUBMANDIBULAR REGION
From the point of view of surgical procedures, the muscles in 
the submandibular region form four muscular planes; from 
superficial to deep, these are:
1. First muscular plane: formed by the digastric and 
stylohyoid muscles.
2. Second muscular plane: formed by the mylohyoid 
muscle.
3. Third muscular plane: formed by the geniohyoid, 
hyoglossus, and styloglossus muscles.
4. Fourth muscular plane: formed by the genioglossus 
and a part of superior constrictor of the pharynx.
MUSCLES OF FIRST MUSCULAR PLANE
Digastric Muscle (Fig. 9.2)
It is a strap-like muscle consisting of posterior and anterior 
bellies, united by an intermediate tendon. This muscle is so 
called because it has two bellies.
Origin
1. The bipinnate posterior belly arises from the mastoid 
notch of the temporal bone.
2. The unipinnate anterior belly arises from the digastric 
fossa on the lower border of the mandible close to the 
symphysis menti.
Insertion
1. Posterior belly passes downwards and forwards 
between the carotid triangle below and behind and 
digastric triangle above and in front and inserted into 
the intermediate tendon.
2. Anterior belly passes downwards and backwards on the 
mylohyoid to be inserted into the intermediate tendon.
The intermediate tendon is anchored to the junction of 
the body and greater cornu of hyoid bone by an inverted 
U-shaped facial sling of investing layer of deep cervical 
fascia. The tendon of digastric muscle passes between the 
two slips of tendon of stylohyoid muscle.
Nerve supply
1. The posterior belly develops from mesoderm of the 2nd 
pharyngeal arch and therefore, supplied by the facial 
nerve.
2. The anterior belly develops from the 1st pharyngeal arch 
and, therefore, supplied by the mylohyoid nerve, a 
branch of inferior alveolar nerve from mandibular 
nerve.
Actions
1. Helps to depress the mandible when the mouth is 
opened widely against resistance.
2. Pulls the hyoid bone upwards during deglutition.
Relations of the posterior belly of the digastric muscle
1. Superficial:
(a) Skin, superficial fascia, platysma, and investing layer 
of deep cervical fascia.
(b) Mastoid process and sternocleidomastoid muscle.
(c) Parotid gland and the angle of the mandible.
2. Deep (Fig. 9.3):
(a) Neurovascular bundle of neck consisting of internal 
jugular vein, external and internal carotid arteries 
10th, 11th,and 12th cranial nerves.
(b) Upper border: Stylohyoid muscle and posterior 
auricular artery run along the upper border of the 
posterior belly of the digastric.
Fig. 9.2 Origin and insertion of the digastric muscle.
Stylohyoid muscle
Origin
Mastoid notch of
temporal bone
POSTERIOR BELLY OF 
DIGASTRIC
Intermediate
tendon
ANTERIOR BELLY OF 
DIGASTRIC
Origin
Digastric fossa of 
mandible
--- Page 136 ---
Submandibular Region
(c) Lower border: Occipital artery runs along and 
under the cover of the lower border of digastric.
N.B. The relations of posterior belly of digastric are 
important because three cranial nerves: 10th, 11th, and 
12th, and three great blood vessels of neck, viz. internal 
jugular vein, internal and external carotid arteries pass deep 
to it.
Differences between the posterior and anterior bellies of 
the digastric muscles are listed in Table 9.1.
Table 9.1 Differences between the anterior and posterior 
belly of the digastric muscle
Anterior belly 
Posterior belly
Unipennate
Bipennate
Develops from 1st pharyngeal 
arch
Develops from 2nd pharyngeal 
arch
Supplied by mylohyoid nerve 
(nerve of 1st pharyngeal arch)
Supplied by facial nerve (nerve 
of 2nd pharyngeal arch)
Stylohyoid Muscle (Fig. 9.4)
It is a slender muscle that lies along the upper border of the 
posterior belly of the digastric muscle.
Origin
It arises from the posterior surface of the styloid process.
Insertion
It is inserted into the hyoid bone at the junction between the 
body and greater cornu. At the insertion, its tendon splits 
into two slips that pass one on either side of the intermediate 
tendon of the digastric muscle (Fig. 9.3).
Nerve supply
The stylohyoid muscle develops from the 2nd arch and, 
therefore, it is supplied by the facial nerve.
Actions
It draws the hyoid bone upwards and backwards, and 
elongates the floor of the mouth.
N.B. The stylohyoid muscle is considered as the delaminated 
portion of the posterior belly of the digastric muscle.
MUSCLES OF SECOND MUSCULAR PLANE
Mylohyoid Muscle (Fig. 9.5)
It is a flat, triangular muscle lying deep to the anterior belly 
of the digastric muscle. The right and left mylohyoid muscles 
join in the median fibrous raphe to form the gutter-shaped 
Fig. 9.3 Important deep relations of the posterior belly of 
the digastric muscle.
Internal jugular vein
Posterior auricular
artery
Occipital artery
Posterior belly of digastric
Lingual artery
Hypoglossal nerve
Facial artery
Ascending pharyngeal
artery
External carotid artery
Internal carotid artery
Hypoglossal nerve
Spinal
accessory nerve
Upper sternomastoid
branch of occipital
artery
Lower sternomastoid
branch of occipital
artery
Vagus nerve
Accessory nerve
Fig. 9.4 Origin and insertion of the stylohyoid muscle.
Styloid process
STYLOHYOID MUSCLE
Insertion
On the junction of
body and greater cornu of
hyoid bone
Origin
From posterior aspect of
styloid process
Fig. 9.5 Origin and insertion of the mylohyoid muscle 
(as seen from below).
Mylohyoid line
Hyoid bone
Origin
From mylohyoid
line of mandible
Insertion
Lower part of the front of body of
hyoid and raphe extending
between middle of body of
hyoid and symphysis menti
Fibrous raphe from
middle of hyoid to
symphysis menti
MYLOHYOID
MUSCLE
--- Page 137 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
floor of the mouth; over which lies the tongue, hence the 
floor of the mouth is also called diaphragma oris.
Origin
From the mylohyoid line of the mandible.
Insertion
The fibres run downwards and medially. The posterior fibres 
are inserted into the body of the hyoid bone. The middle and 
anterior fibres are inserted into the median fibrous raphe 
extending from symphysis menti to the hyoid bone.
Nerve supply
The mylohyoid muscle develops from the first pharyngeal 
arch, therefore it is supplied by mylohyoid nerve, a branch of 
inferior alveolar nerve from mandibular nerve.
Actions
1. The mylohyoid muscle elevates the floor of the mouth 
and hence the tongue during the first stage of the 
deglutition.
2. It also helps in the depression of the mandible against 
resistance.
3. It fixes or elevates the hyoid bone.
MUSCLES OF THIRD MUSCULAR PLANE
Geniohyoid Muscle (Fig. 9.6)
It is a narrow muscle that lies alongside the midline deep to 
the mylohyoid.
Origin
From inferior genial tubercle of the mandible.
Insertion
The fibres run backwards and downwards to be inserted into 
the anterior surface (front) of the body of the hyoid bone, 
above the medial part of the mylohyoid muscle.
Nerve supply
C1 fibres through hypoglossal nerve.
Actions
1. The geniohyoid elevates the hyoid bone by pulling it 
upwards and forwards and thus shortens the floor of the 
mouth.
2. They may depress the mandible when the hyoid bone is 
fixed.
Hyoglossus Muscle (Fig. 9.7)
It is the flat quadrilateral muscle of the tongue.
Origin
From upper surface of the entire length of the greater cornu 
and adjacent part of the body of hyoid bone.
Insertion
Into the side of tongue between styloglossus laterally and 
inferior longitudinal medially. The fibres of hyoglossus from 
hyoid bone run upwards and slightly forward and decussate 
with the fibres of styloglossus.
N.B. A part of hyoglossus may be attached to the lesser 
cornu of the hyoid bone and form a separate muscle called 
chondroglossus.
Relations 
The hyoglossus, a quadrilateral sheet of muscle, is the key 
muscle of the suprahyoid region because it serves as a 
landmark for neighboring structures in the region. Therefore, 
its relations are very important to surgeons.
Superficial relations (Fig. 9.8): The superficial relations of 
the hyoglossus are as follows:
1. Hypoglossal nerve, crosses the lower part of muscle from 
behind forwards.
2. Lingual nerve, crosses the upper part of muscle from 
behind forwards.
Fig. 9.6 Origin and insertion of the geniohyoid muscle.
Inferior genial tubercle
GENIOHYOID
Insertion
On the front of the body of hyoid above
the medial part of the mylohyoid muscle
Origin
Inferior genial tubercle
Fig. 9.7 Origin and insertion of the hyoglossus muscle.
Origin
From upper surface of the
greater cornu and adjacent
part of the body of hyoid bone
Geniohyoid
Insertion
Into posterior half of
the side of tongue
HYOGLOSSUS
Tongue
--- Page 138 ---
Submandibular Region
3. Deep 
part 
submandibular 
gland 
submandibular duct. The gland lies in the middle of 
hyoglossus muscle and the duct lies between the gland 
and the muscle.
4. Submandibular ganglion lies between the lingual nerve 
and deep part of the submandibular gland.
5. Styloglossus muscle—interdigitates with hyoglossus.
6. Mylohyoid 
muscle 
overlaps 
hyoglossus 
anterosuperiorly.
Deep relations (Fig. 9.22D): The deep relations of the 
hyoglossus are as follows:
1. Inferior longitudinal muscle of tongue.
2. Genioglossus muscle anteriorly.
3. Middle constrictor of pharynx posteriorly.
4. Glossopharyngeal nerve.
5. Stylohyoid ligament.
6. Lingual artery.
Structures passing deep to posterior border of hyoglossus
From above downwards, these are (Fig. 9.8) as follows:
1. Glossopharyngeal nerve.
2. Stylohyoid ligament.
3. Lingual artery.
Nerve supply
The hyoglossus muscle develops from occipital myotomes,
therefore, it is supplied by hypoglossal nerve.
Actions
1. Depresses the side of tongue to make the dorsal surface 
of the tongue convex.
2. Helps in the retraction of the protruded tongue.
Styloglossus Muscle (Fig. 9.9)
Origin
From front of the tip of styloid process and adjoining part of 
stylohyoid ligament.
Insertion
The fibres run forwards to be inserted into the whole length 
of the side of tongue, interdigitating with the fibres of the 
hyoglossus muscle.
Nerve supply
It is supplied by hypoglossal nerve.
Actions
Retracts the tongue upwards and backwards, and thus it is 
antagonist to the genioglossus. Along with its counterpart of 
opposite side, it forms a median gutter on the dorsum of 
tongue for the passage of food.
MUSCLES OF FOURTH MUSCULAR PLANE
Genioglossus Muscle (Fig. 9.10)
It is a fan-shaped extrinsic muscle of tongue and along with 
its counterpart of the opposite side forms the most of the 
bulk of the tongue.
Fig. 9.8 Superficial relations of the hyoglossus muscle.
Submandibular
ganglion
Lingual nerve
Submandibular
duct
Deep part of submandibular gland
Hypoglossal nerve
Hyoglossus
muscle
Venae comitantes
nervi hypoglossi
Suprahyoid artery
3. Lingual artery
1. Glossopharyngeal
 
nerve
2. Stylohyoid ligament
Structure passing
deep to posterior border
of hyoglossus
Fig. 9.9 Origin and insertion of the styloglossus muscle.
STYLOGLOSSUS
Insertion
Into whole length of
the side of tongue
Origin
From the front of styloid
process and adjacent part
of the stylohyoid ligament
Stylohyoid ligament
--- Page 139 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
Origin
From superior genial tubercle of the mandible.
Insertion
The fibres radiate backwards fan-wise into the substance of 
the corresponding half of the tongue alongside the median 
septum, from the tip to the base, for insertion.
1. Lower fibres are inserted into the body of the hyoid and 
form the root of the tongue.
2. Intermediate fibres pass beneath the anterior border of 
the hyoglossus and extend backwards up to stylohyoid 
ligament and middle constrictor of the pharynx.
3. Upper fibres turn upwards and forwards to extend up to 
the tip of the tongue.
Nerve supply
It is supplied by hypoglossal nerve.
Actions
The muscles of both sides together protrude the tongue and 
make an elongated gutter on the dorsal surface of the tongue 
for the passage of food.
NERVES OF THE SUBMANDIBULAR REGION
LINGUAL NERVE
The lingual nerve arises from posterior division of the 
mandibular nerve, and descends between the ramus of the 
mandible and the medial pterygoid muscle. It then inclines 
forwards and enters the mouth by passing inferior to the 
lower border of the superior constrictor of the pharynx at its 
attachment near the posterior end of the mylohyoid line. 
Now it enters the submandibular region by passing just 
behind and inferior to the third molar tooth between medial 
surface of the mandible and the mucus membrane of the 
gum (Fig. 9.11).
In this position, it is liable to be injured by the clumsy 
extraction of the adjacent tooth, and is accessible to local 
anesthetics. In its further course, the lingual nerve lies close 
to the side of the tongue, crosses the styloglossus and upper 
part of the hyoglossus, and hooks beneath the submandibular 
duct. In the process, it crosses the submandibular duct 
superficially and then turns up deep to the duct (the double 
crossing).
Attached to the undersurface of the nerve is the 
submandibular ganglion, which lies on hyoglossus just above 
the deep part of the submandibular gland and supplies it 
secretomotor fibres that have synapse in the ganglion. Other 
postganglionic fibres re-enter the lingual nerve, which 
transports them to the sublingual gland.
The lingual nerve is itself sensory to the anterior two-
third of the tongue and the inner (lingual) surface of the 
gums, but its content fibres belonging to the chorda tympani 
nerve carry taste sensations from the anterior two-third of 
the tongue except from vallate papillae.
Branches
The lingual nerve gives the following two sets of branches:
1. Branches of communication (communicating twigs),
viz.
(a) Two or more to submandibular ganglion.
(b) One or two which descend along the anterior border 
of the hyoglossus to unite with the hypoglossal 
nerve.
2. Branches of distribution, viz.
(a) A gingival branch to the inner surface of the gum.
(b) Few twigs to the sublingual gland.
(c) Branches to the anterior two-third of the tongue.
Fig. 9.10 Origin and insertion of the genioglossus muscle.
Insertion
From tip to base of tongue and
body of hyoid bone
Origin
Superior genial
tubercle of
mandible
Tip of tongue
Superior genial
tubercle
Hyoid
bone
GENIOGLOSSUS
Fig. 9.11 Features of the internal aspect of the right half of 
the body of mandible.
Mandibular
foramen
Lingula
Temporalis
Inferior alveolar nerve
Lateral pterygoid
Pterygomandibular
raphe
Area covered by
oral mucus membrane
Genial
tubercles
Digastric
fossa
Sublingual gland in
sublingual fossa
Genioglossus
Geniohyoid
Anterior belly of 
digastric muscle
Submandibular gland in
submandibular fossa
Mylohyoid
groove
Auriculo-
temporal
nerve
Lingual
nerve
Medial
pterygoid
--- Page 140 ---
Submandibular Region
HYPOGLOSSAL NERVE
The hypoglossal nerve runs forwards, crosses internal carotid 
artery, external carotid artery, and loop of lingual before it 
enters the submandibular region by passing deep to the 
posterior belly of the digastric muscle. It continues its course 
forwards and upwards on the hyoglossus (below the lingual) 
and then on the genioglossus to enter the tongue. Here it 
supplies all the muscles of the tongue (intrinsic and 
extrinsic), except palatoglossus, which is not really a muscle 
of the tongue.
GLOSSOPHARYNGEAL NERVE
glossopharyngeal 
nerve 
before 
entering 
submandibular region descends on the medial side of the 
stylopharyngeus muscle, curves around its lower border to 
run forward on its lateral side and supplies it. Then it runs 
parallel with the lower border of the styloglossus and passes 
deep to the stylohyoid ligament to disappear underneath the 
posterior border of the hyoglossus in order to reach the 
tongue.
Its lingual branches convey both general and taste 
sensations from the posterior one-third of the tongue.
BLOOD VESSELS OF THE 
SUBMANDIBULAR REGION
Arteries
The arteries supplying the submandibular regions are:
1. Facial artery: The facial artery enters the submandibular 
region by passing deep to digastric and stylohyoid 
muscles, turns forwards above these muscles to reach the 
deep aspect of the angle of the mandible. Now it first 
hooks round the posterosuperior aspect of the 
submandibular gland, descends between the lateral 
surface of the gland and medial pterygoid muscle (Fig. 
9.16), then hooks round the lower border of the 
mandible to reach the face. Before hooking round the 
lower border of the mandible it gives rise to submental
branch.
2. Lingual artery: The lingual artery after forming a 
U-shaped loop above the tip of greater cornu of hyoid 
bone runs forwards deep to the hyoglossus above the 
hyoid bone and gives rise to two dorsalis lingual arteries, 
which supply posterior one-third of the tongue and 
tonsil.
Then it ascends along the anterior border of 
hyoglossus and lies on the genioglossus. Here it gives 
rise to sublingual artery, which supplies the sublingual
salivary gland.
N.B. Before entering deep to the hyoglossus, it gives off 
suprahyoid artery, which runs along the superior border of 
the hyoid bone, lateral to the hyoglossus.
Veins
The veins present in the submandibular region are as 
follows:
1. Vena comitantes nervi hypoglossi: These two veins run 
along the hypoglossal nerve.
2. Vena comitantes: These two veins accompany the 
lingual artery and run deep to the hyoglossus muscle.
All of the above four veins join to form the lingual vein, 
which drains into the common facial or internal jugular vein.
SALIVARY GLANDS IN THE 
SUBMANDIBULAR REGION
There are two pairs of large salivary glands in the 
submandibular region. These are submandibular and 
sublingual salivary glands. The first is located mainly below 
the floor of the mouth and the latter above the floor of the 
mouth (Fig. 9.12).
SUBMANDIBULAR GLAND
The submandibular gland is one of the three pairs of paired 
salivary glands. This large salivary gland, about the size of a 
walnut, is situated partly below and partly deep to the 
posterior half of the mandible. It is half the size of the parotid 
gland and weighs about 10–20 g. It is a mixed type of gland 
(that is both mucus and serous in nature) but predominantly 
serous.
Fig. 9.12 Left submandibular and sublingual salivary glands.
Deep part of
submandibular
gland
Mylohyoid muscle
(floor of mouth)
Superficial part of submandibular gland
Sublingual
gland
Mylohyoid
line
--- Page 141 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
Parts
It consists of two parts: (a) a large superficial part and (b) a 
small deep part. The superficial part lies superficial to the 
mylohyoid muscle, while deep part lies deep to the mylohyoid 
muscle. The two parts are continuous with each other around 
the posterior border of the mylohyoid muscle (Fig. 9.13).
Superficial Part
This part of the gland is quite large and fills the anterior part 
of the digastric triangle extending upwards up to the 
mylohyoid line. The superficial part presents two ends—
anterior and posterior and three surfaces—inferior, lateral, 
and medial.
The anterior end extends up to the anterior belly of the 
digastric muscle.
The posterior end extends up to the stylomandibular 
ligament, which separates the submandibular gland from the 
parotid gland. This end presents a groove produced by 
ascending limb of the cervical loop of the facial artery.
Fascial covering or capsule (Fig. 9.14)
The superficial part is partially enclosed between the two 
layers of investing layer of deep cervical fascia. At the greater 
cornu of hyoid bone the investing layer of deep cervical fascia 
splits into two laminae to enclose the superficial part. The 
superficial layer covers the inferior surface of the gland and is 
attached to the base of the mandible. The deep layer covers 
the medial surface of the gland and is attached to the 
mylohyoid line of the mandible.
Relations
The three surfaces of the superficial part have important 
relations:
 Superficial surface (inferior surface) from superficial to 
deep is covered by the following structures (Fig. 9.15):
– Skin.
– Superficial fascia containing platysma and cervical 
branch of facial nerve.
– Deep fascia.
– Facial vein.
– Submandibular lymph nodes.
 Lateral surface is related to (Fig. 9.16):
– Submandibular fossa on the inner aspect of the body 
of mandible.
– Medial pterygoid muscle (near its insertion).
– Facial artery.
It is important to note that the facial artery loops 
downwards and forwards between the bone and the gland, 
and then winds around the lower border of the body of 
the mandible at the anteroinferior angle of the mandible 
to reach the face (Fig. 9.16).
Fig. 9.13 Horizontal section through submandibular region 
showing the parts of submandibular gland. The sublingual 
salivary gland is also seen. Note the relationship of the 
sublingual gland with the deep part of the submandibular 
gland.
Hyoglossus
Posterior border of
mylohyoid
Superficial part of
submandibular
gland
Deep part of
submandibular
gland
Mylohyoid muscle
Tongue
SUBLINGUAL
GLAND
Fig. 9.14 Capsule of the superficial part of the submandibular 
gland.
Mandibular canal
Submandibular fossa
Superficial lamina of fascia
Submandibular gland
Mylohyoid line
Deep lamina of fascia
Investing layer of deep cervical fascia
Fig. 9.15 Relations of the superficial (inferior) surface of the 
submandibular salivary gland. The relations of anterior part 
of the medial (deep) surface are also seen.
Mylohyoid muscle
Mylohyoid nerve
Mylohyoid artery
Submandibular
lymph nodes
Deep fascia
Facial vein
Cervical branch
of facial nerve
Relation of the anterior
part of medial surface
Relation of
superficial/inferior
surface
Skin
Platysma
--- Page 142 ---
Submandibular Region
 Medial surface is extensive and divided into three parts: 
anterior, middle, and posterior (Fig. 9.17):
(a) Anterior part is related to:
– Mylohyoid muscle.
– Submental branch of facial artery.
– Mylohyoid nerve and vessels.
(b) Middle (intermediate) part is related to:
– Hyoglossus muscle.
– Styloglossus muscle.
– Lingual and hypoglossal nerves.
– Submandibular ganglion.
(c) Posterior part is related to:
– Styloglossus muscle.
– Stylohyoid ligament.
– Glossopharyngeal nerve.
– Wall of pharynx.
Deep Part
The deep part is small and lies on the hyoglossus muscle 
deep to the mylohyoid; posteriorly it is continuous with 
superficial part around the posterior border of the 
mylohyoid, and anteriorly it extends up to the sublingual 
salivary gland (Fig. 9.13).
Relations (Fig. 9.18)
Medial: 
Hyoglossus.
Lateral: 
Mylohyoid.
Superior: Lingual nerve and submandibular ganglion.
Inferior: 
 Hypoglossal nerve accompanied by a pair of veins 
(Venae comitantes nervi hypoglossi).
Submandibular duct (Wharton’s duct; Fig. 9.19)
The submandibular duct is about 5 cm long and emerges at 
the anterior end of the deep part. It runs forwards on the 
hyoglossus between the lingual and hypoglossal nerves. Near 
the anterior border of the hyoglossus, it is crossed by lingual 
nerve. It continues running forward between the sublingual 
gland and the genioglossus. Here it lies just deep to the 
mucus membrane of the oral cavity. Finally, it opens into the 
oral cavity on the summit of a sublingual papilla at the side 
of the frenulum of the tongue.
Blood supply
The gland is supplied by sublingual and submental arteries 
and drained by common facial and lingual veins.
Lymphatic drainage
The lymphatics from submandibular gland first drain into 
submandibular lymph nodes and subsequently into jugulo-
digastric lymph nodes.
Facial artery
Medial pterygoid muscle
Superficial lamina of investing
layer of deep cervical fascia
Fig. 9.16 Relations of the lateral surface.
Fig. 9.17 Relations of the medial (deep) surface of the submandibular gland.
Anterior part of medial
surface is related to
Submental branch of
facial artery
Mylohyoid nerve and vessels
Mylohyoid muscle
Intermediate tendon of
digastric muscle
Hyoglossus muscle
Hypoglossal nerve
Lingual artery
Middle constrictor of
pharynx
Stylopharyngeus
muscle
Styloglossus muscle
Lingual nerve
Posterior belly of
digastric muscle
Structures forming
the relations of
posterior part of
medial deep surface
Glossopharyngeal
nerve
Forms the relations of
intermediate part of
medial surface
--- Page 143 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
N.B. Earlier it was thought that only parasympathetic supply 
is secretomotor and sympathetic supply is vasomotor. Now 
it is established without doubt that both parasympathetic 
and sympathetic supplies are secretomotor. Parasympathetic 
stimulation produces watery secretion whereas sympathetic 
stimulation produces sticky mucus-rich secretion. In addition, 
sympathetic supply is vasomotor.
• The formation of calculi in the submandibular gland 
and its duct is more common than in the parotid duct for 
two reasons:
(a) Its secretion is more viscid.
(b) Its duct takes a tortuous and upward course, which 
hampers its smooth drainage (against gravity) into 
the floor of the mouth.
• The excision of the submandibular gland for calculus or 
tumor is done by skin incision below the angle of the 
mandible. Since the marginal mandibular branch of facial 
nerve passes one inch posteroinferior to the angle of the 
mandible before crossing its lower border, the incision 
therefore should be given 4 cm below the angle to avoid 
injury to this nerve.
• The swellings of the submandibular gland can be 
palpated bimanually by putting an index finger in the 
mouth and thumb below the angle of the jaw in relation to 
the position of gland (Fig. 9.20), because part of the gland 
lies in the oral cavity above the floor of the mouth and part 
outside the oral cavity below the floor of the mouth. The 
submandibular lymph nodes lying on the surface of the 
gland cannot be palpated bimanually as they lie below the 
floor of the mouth (oral diaphragm). Thus an enlarged 
submandibular gland can be differentiated from a mass of 
the submandibular lymph nodes by bimanual palpation.
Clinical correlation
Fig. 9.18 Location and relations of the deep part of 
submandibular gland and submandibular ganglion. Red 
circle of broken line represents the superficial part of the 
submandibular gland.
Submandibular
ganglion
Deep part of
submandibular
gland
Lingual nerve
Hypoglossal nerve
Outline of superficial
part of submandibular 
gland
Hyoglossus
muscle
Fig. 9.19 Submandibular and sublingual ducts.
Hypoglossal
nerve
Hyoglossus
Mylohyoid
Submandibular gland
Genioglossus
Submandibular duct
Lingual nerve
Submandibular
ganglion
Opening of
submandibular
duct on
sublingual
papilla
Sublingual gland
Nerve supply
The gland is supplied by parasympathetic, sympathetic, 
and sensory fibres (Fig. 9.21):
1. Parasympathetic (secretomotor) supply:
(a) The preganglionic parasympathetic fibres arise from 
superior salivatory nucleus in the pons and pass 
successively through facial, chorda tympani, and 
lingual nerves; and terminate in the submandibular 
ganglion, which serves as a relay station.
(b) The postganglionic fibres arise from this ganglion 
and directly supply the submandibular gland.
2. Sympathetic supply: The preganglionic fibres arise from 
T1 spinal segment and enter the cervical sympathetic 
trunk to relay in its superior cervical sympathetic 
ganglion. The postganglionic fibres arise from superior 
cervical sympathetic ganglion, form plexus around facial 
artery, and thus reach gland through this artery.
3. Sensory supply: The gland gets its sensory supply by the 
lingual nerve.
Fig. 9.20 Bimanual palpation of the submandibular salivary 
gland. (Source: Fig. 6.7, Page 295, Clinical and Surgical 
Anatomy, 2e, Vishram Singh. Copyright Elsevier 2007, All 
rights reserved).
Small deep part of
submandibular gland
Large superficial part of
submandibular gland
Mylohyoid
--- Page 144 ---
Submandibular Region
• The stone in the submandibular duct can also be pal pated 
manually within the mouth and can even be seen if 
sufficiently large.
• The stone is removed from within the mouth by incis ing 
the mucus membrane and duct over the stone.
SUBLINGUAL GLAND
This is smallest of the three pairs of large salivary glands. It 
lies in the floor of the mouth between the mucus mem-
brane and the mylohyoid muscle. It is almond shaped and 
rests in the sublingual fossa of the mandible. It is separated 
from the base of the tongue by the submandibular duct. It 
is mostly mucus in nature and weighs about 3–4 g. The 
gland pours its secretion by a series of ducts, about 15 in 
number, into the oral cavity on the sublingual fold, but a 
few of them open into the submandibular duct.
N.B. The gland actually possesses about 20 ducts. Most of 
these ducts (ducts of Rivinus) open separately on the 
sublingual fold, while some ducts from anterior part of the 
gland unite to form the sublingual duct (duct of Bartholin),
which opens into the submandibular duct.
Nerve supply
It is similar to that of submandibular salivary gland.
Blood supply
The gland is supplied by the sublingual and submental 
arteries.
Lymphatic drainage
The lymphatics from the sublingual gland drain into 
submental and submandibular lymph nodes.
A ranula is a large mucus retention cyst in the floor of mouth 
arising from sublingual salivary gland. Some times it may 
arise from accessory salivary glands, called glands of 
Blandin and Nuhn, present in the floor of mouth. The 
swelling is soft, bluish in color, and transilluminates. It looks 
like the belly of frog (Rana hexadactyla), hence the name 
ranula.
Clinical correlation
DEVELOPMENT OF THE SUBMANDIBULAR AND 
SUBLINGUAL SALIVARY GLANDS
The submandibular and sublingual glands develop as 
outgrowths from the endodermal lining of the floor of the 
mouth (at alveololingual sulcus). The submandibular 
gland arises from a single large bud whereas sublingual 
gland arises from a series of small buds, which retain their 
connection with the floor of the mouth. As a result the 
submandibular gland pours its secretion by a single duct 
and sublingual gland by several ducts in the floor of the 
mouth.
N.B. The parotid gland develops as an outgrowth of 
ectodermal lining of the vestibule of the mouth.
To have a clear concept about three major salivary glands, 
they are compared in Table 9.2.
Table 9.2 Distinguishing features of the parotid, submandibular, and sublingual salivary glands
Parotid gland
Submandibular gland
Sublingual gland
Location
Near the ear
Below the mandible
Below the tongue
Development
Ectodermal
Endodermal
Endodermal
Size
Largest (25 g)
Smaller (10–20 g)
Smallest (3–4 g)
Shape
Pyramidal shaped 
J-shaped 
Almond shaped
Duct and its site of 
opening in oral cavity
Parotid duct opens into 
vestibule of oral cavity 
opposite the second upper 
molar tooth
Submandibular duct opens into the 
floor of oral cavity proper on 
summit of sublingual papilla at the 
side of frenulum of the tongue
Series of ducts open into the floor of 
the oral cavity proper on the 
sublingual fold
Secretomotor nerve 
supply
• Through lesser petrosal 
nerve
• Preganglionic fibres arise 
from inferior salivatory 
nucleus
• Postganglionic fibres arise 
from otic ganglion
• Through chorda tympani
• Preganglionic fibres arise from 
superior salivatory nucleus 
• Postganglionic fibres arise from 
submandibular ganglion
• Through chorda tympani nerve
• Preganglionic fibres arise from 
superior salivatory nucleus
• Postganglionic fibres arise from 
submandibular ganglion
Nature of secretion
Serous 
Both serous and mucus
Mucus
--- Page 145 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
COMPARISON OF THE THREE LARGE SALIVARY GLANDS
The comparative characteristics of the three salivary glands 
are presented in Table 9.2.
SUBMANDIBULAR GANGLION 
(LANGLEY’S GANGLION)
It is a parasympathetic ganglion, which serves as a relay 
station for secretomotor fibres supplying the submandibular 
and sublingual salivary glands.
Topographically, it is connected to the trigeminal nerve 
(lingual nerve) but functionally it is related to the facial nerve 
(through its chorda tympani branch).
Location
This ganglion is of the size of a pin-head and situated on the 
outer surface of the hyoglossus muscle. It is suspended from 
lingual nerve by two twigs. The proximal twig is afferent to 
the ganglion and distal root is efferent to the ganglion.
Relations (Fig. 9.18)
Above: 
Lingual nerve.
Below: 
Deep part of the submandibular gland.
Medial: Hyoglossus muscle.
Lateral: Submandibular gland (superficial part).
Roots (Fig. 9.21)
The submandibular ganglion has three roots, viz.:
parasympathetic, sympathetic, and sensory.
1. Parasympathetic root: It is derived from lingual nerve. 
The preganglionic fibres arise from superior salivatory 
nucleus situated in pons and pass successively through 
facial nerve, chorda tympani, and lingual nerves to reach 
the ganglion where they relay. The postganglionic fibres 
arise from ganglion and directly supply the gland.
2. Sympathetic root: It is derived from sympathetic plexus 
around the facial artery. The preganglionic fibres arise 
from the first thoracic spinal segment (T1) and enter the 
cervical sympathetic chain to relay in superior ganglion. 
The postganglionic fibres arise from superior cervical 
sympathetic ganglion, form plexus around the facial 
artery to pass through the ganglion without relay and 
supply the blood vessels in the submandibular and 
sublingual salivary glands.
3. Sensory root: It is derived from lingual nerve.
Branches
The branches of the submandibular ganglion are:
1. Five to six branches, which supply the submandibular 
gland.
2. Other fibres join the lingual nerve to supply the 
sublingual and anterior lingual glands.
SURGICAL PLANES OF THE 
SUBMANDIBULAR REGION
During surgery in the submandibular region, the incision is 
given about 4 cm below the mandible. After giving incision, a 
surgeon must keep in mind that deep structures in this 
region are arranged in four muscular planes (Fig. 9.22). 
These structures are already described under the section on 
muscles of the submandibular region. However, for an 
overview and convenience of understanding these planes are 
summarized in the following text (Fig. 9.22).
First Muscular Plane (Fig. 9.22A)
The major structures in this are (a) digastric muscle and 
(b) most of the superficial part of the submandibular gland. 
The submandibular lymph nodes lie in close relation to the 
submandibular gland and are partly hidden under the body 
of the mandible. Note that superficial part of the 
submandibular gland partly overlaps both anterior and 
posterior bellies of the digastric muscle. The facial artery 
emerges on face by winding around the lower border of the 
mandible.
Second Muscular Plane (Fig. 9.22B)
The major structures in this plane are (a) mylohyoid muscle 
and (b) mylohyoid nerve and vessels emerge from under 
cover of the mandible. There is also a large submental branch 
of the facial artery. The hypoglossal nerve runs horizontally 
forward on hyoglossus accompanied by venae comitantes 
nervi hypoglossi.
Third Muscular Plane (Fig. 9.22C)
The major structures in this plane are (a) lingual and 
hypoglossal nerves, which communicate with each other 
near the anterior border of hyoglossus, (b) deep part of the 
Fig. 9.21 Submandibular ganglion and its connections.
Superior salivatory nucleus
Chorda tympani nerve
Lingual nerve
Tongue
Facial nerve
Sympathetic plexus
around facial artery
Superior cervical
sympathetic
ganglion
Pons
Sublingual
gland
Submandibular
ganglion
Submandibular
gland
T1 segment of spinal cord
--- Page 146 ---
Submandibular Region
Fig. 9.22 Planes of the submandibular region: A, first muscular plane; B, second muscular plane; C, third surgical (muscular) 
plane; D, fourth surgical (muscular) plane.
Facial artery
Mylohyoid
line
Submandibular
lymph nodes
Submandibular gland
(superficial part)
Anterior belly of
digastric muscle
Stylohyoid muscle
Posterior belly of
digastric muscle
Mylohyoid nerve
and vessels
Mylohyoid
line
Glossopharyngeal
nerve
Stylohyoid ligament
Facial artery
Submental
branch of
facial artery
Mylohyoid nerve and 
vessels
Mylohyoid
muscle
Hyoglossus
muscle
Lingual artery
Hypoglossal
nerve
Venae comitantes
nervi hypoglossi
Styloglossus
muscle
Stylopharyngeus
muscle
Stylopharyngeus
muscle
Lingual nerve
Glossopharyngeal
nerve
Stylohyoid
ligament
Venae comitantes
nervi hypoglossi
Suprahyoid
artery
Lingual
artery
Deep part of
submandibular
gland
Hyoglossus
muscle
Sublingual
gland
Submandibular
ganglion
Submandibular
duct
Styloglossus
muscle
Stylopharyngeus
muscle
Glossopharyngeal
nerve
Lingual artery
Geniohyoid
muscle
Venae comitantes of 
lingual artery
Genioglossus
muscle
Tonsillar branches of
dorsalis lingual arteries
Dorsal lingual
arteries
Soft palate
Stylohyoid
ligament
Tonsil
submandibular gland and submandibular duct, (c) sub-
mandibular ganglion, and (d) styloglossus muscle being 
crossed superficially by the lingual nerve. Note the double 
crossing of submandibular duct by lingual nerve. The 
structures passing deep to posterior border of hyoglossus are 
also seen.
Fourth Muscular Plane (Fig. 9.22D)
The major structures in this plane are genioglossus muscle, 
middle constrictor of the pharynx, and lingual artery and 
its branches of distribution are the key features of this 
plane.
--- Page 147 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
A 35-year-old woman went to her family physician and 
complained that she felt pain and swelling beneath her 
right jaw each time she ate a meal. She also told the 
doctor that pain and swelling more or less completely 
resolves after taking meal for a time until she takes her 
next meal—when the same symptoms appear again. 
On examination the physician made following 
observations.
 Presence of swelling beneath the posterior portion 
of her right mandible.
 The swelling was bimanually palpable.
He referred the case to ENT surgeon who advised 
CT scan of the region. CT scan confirmed the presence 
of a large stone in the submandibular gland. He 
performed a surgery and removed her submandibular 
gland. After surgery she noticed a weakness at the 
corner of her mouth.
Questions
1. Why is formation of calculus more common in the 
sub man dibular gland as compared to the parotid 
gland?
2. Why is submandibular swelling bimanually 
palpable?
3. Why did the patient feel weakness at the corner of 
her mouth after surgery?
Answers
1. It is because secretion of the s ubmandibular gland 
is more viscous than that of parotid gland. Secondly, 
the course of submandibular duct is upwards and 
tortuous, which hampers the efficient drainage of 
its secretion (also refer page 127).
2. Because it lies on both sides (i.e., above and below) 
of the floor of the mouth.
3. Due to traction on marginal mandibular branch of 
the facial nerve.
Clinical Case Study
Golden Facts to Remember
  Key muscle of the submandibular region
Hyoglossus
  Smallest of the three pairs of large salivary glands
Sublingual salivary gland
  Wharton's duct
Submandibular duct
  Ducts of Rivinus
Ducts of sublingual salivary gland
  Langley's ganglion
Submandibular ganglion
  Most commonly damaged artery during surgical 
removal of the submandibular gland
Facial artery
  Most commonly damaged major nerve during and 
surgical removal of submandibular gland
Lingual nerve is (inadvertently) damaged during 
ligation and division of the submandibular duct
--- Page 148 ---
Infratemporal Fossa, 
Temporomandibular 
Joint, and Pterygo-
palatine Fossa
CHAPTER
INFRATEMPORAL FOSSA
The infratemporal fossa is the space beneath the base of the 
skull, between the side wall of the pharynx and ramus of the 
mandible. It communicates with the temporal fossa through 
a gap deep to the zygomatic arch. It is also referred to as the 
parapharyngeal space or lateral pharyngeal space.
BOUNDARIES
The boundaries of infratemporal fossa (Fig. 10.1) are:
Roof: 
 Formed by the infratemporal surface of the 
greater wing of the sphenoid. It is pierced by 
foramen spinosum and foramen ovale.
Medial wall: 
 Formed by lateral surface of the lateral 
pterygoid plate of the sphenoid. It is separated 
from the anterior wall by pterygomaxillary 
fissure.
Lateral wall: 
Formed by the ramus of the mandible.
Anterior wall: Formed by the infratemporal surface of the 
maxilla. It is separated from roof by inferior 
orbital fissure.
Floor: 
 Open and extends up to the level of the base 
of the mandible.
Posterior wall: Formed by styloid process of the temporal 
bone.
COMMUNICATIONS (Figs 10.2 and 10.3)
The infratemporal fossa communicates:
Fig. 10.1 Boundaries of the infratemporal fossa.
Infratemporal fossa
Open (Floor)
Foramen spinosum
Infratemporal surface of greater wing of sphenoid (Roof)
Foramen ovale
Pterygomaxillary fissure
Lateral surface of lateral pterygoid
plate (Medial wall)
Infratemporal surface of maxilla
(Anterior wall)
Styloid process (Posterior wall)
Fig. 10.2 Communication (arrows) between infratemporal 
and temporal fossae.
Superior temporal line
Temporal fascia
Temporal fossa
Infratemporal fossa
Ramus and coronoid
process of mandible
Lateral
pterygoid plate
Zygomatic arch
--- Page 149 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
(a) above with the temporal fossa through a gap, deep to 
zygomatic arch; and middle cranial fossa through 
foramen ovale and foramen spinosum,
(b) below it is continuous with the tissue spaces of the neck 
lateral to the pharynx,
(c) with the pterygopalatine fossa through pterygo-
maxillary fissure, and
(d) with the orbit through inferior orbital fissure.
All communications are presented in Flowchart 10.1.
Temporal fossa
Pterygopalatine fossa
Nasal cavity
Through
gap deep to
zygomatic arch
Through
pterygomaxillary
fissure
Orbit
Through
inferior orbital
fissure
Infratemporal fossa
Through
sphenopalatine
foramen
Flowchart 10.1 Communications of the infratemporal fossa.
N.B. The infratemporal fossa can be best visualized as a 
hollow cube without floor (Fig. 10.3).
CONTENTS
The major structures present in the infratemporal fossa are:
1. Muscles: Lateral pterygoid, medial pterygoid, and 
tendon of temporalis.
2. Blood vessels: Maxillary artery, maxillary vein, and 
pterygoid venous plexus.
3. Neural structures: Mandibular nerve, chorda tympani 
nerve, and otic ganglion.
MUSCLES
Lateral Pterygoid (Fig. 10.4)
It is a short, thick conical muscle with its apex pointing 
backwards. It passes backwards and slightly laterally from 
the roof and medial wall of the fossa to the neck of the 
mandible.
Origin
The lateral pterygoid consists of two heads, upper and lower:
1. The upper smaller head arises from the infratemporal 
surface and crest of the greater wing of the sphenoid 
bone.
2. The lower larger head arises from the lateral surface of 
the lateral pterygoid plate of the sphenoid bone.
Insertion
The fibres of two heads run backwards and laterally, and 
converge to form a thick tendon, which is inserted into:
1. Pterygoid fovea on the front of the neck of the mandible.
2. Articular disc and capsule of the temporomandibular 
joint.
Nerve supply
Lateral pterygoid is supplied by a branch of anterior division 
of the mandibular nerve.
Posterior
wall
Roof
Foramen
spinosum
Foramen
ovale
Inferior orbital
fissure
Lateral
wall
Medial
wall
Anterior
wall
Pterygomaxillary
fissure
Fig. 10.3 Schematic diagram to show the boundaries and 
communications of the infratemporal fossa.
Fig. 10.4 Origin and insertion of the lateral pterygoid muscle.
Lower
head of lateral
pterygoid
Lateral
pterygoid
plate
Infratemporal
surface
Infratemporal
crest
Greater wing of sphenoid
Upper head of
lateral pterygoid
Articular
disc
Articular
capsule
--- Page 150 ---
Infratemporal Fossa, Temporomandibular Joint, and Pterygopalatine Fossa
Actions
1. Lateral pterygoids of two sides depress the mandible 
(opens the mouth) by pulling forward the condylar 
processes of the mandible and the articular discs of the 
temporomandibular joints.
2. Lateral and medial pterygoid muscles of two sides acting 
together protrude the mandible.
3. Lateral and medial pterygoid muscles of the two sides 
contract alternately to produce side-to-side movements 
of the lower jaw as in chewing.
N.B. 
• The lower head of lateral pterygoid passes between the two 
heads of the medial pterygoid muscle.
• It is the only masticatory muscle, which opens the mouth.
• The articular disc of temporomandibular joint is 
developmentally a part of tendon of lateral pterygoid muscle.
Relations (Fig. 10.5)
The lateral pterygoid is regarded as the key muscle of the 
infratemporal region because its relations provide a fair idea 
about the layout of structures in this region. Its relations are:
Superficial:
1. Ramus of the mandible.
2. Masseter.
3. Tendon of temporalis.
4. Superficial head of medial pterygoid.
Maxillary artery and its temporal and masseteric branches.
Deep: 
1. Mandibular nerve.
2. Middle meningeal artery.
3. Sphenomandibular ligament.
4. Deep head of medial pterygoid muscle.
Structures emerging at the upper border:
1. Deep temporal nerves (two in number).
2. Masseteric nerve.
Structures emerging at the lower border:
1. Inferior alveolar nerve and artery.
2. Lingual nerve.
3. Middle meningeal artery (it passes up deep to the lower 
border).
Structures passing through the gap between the two heads:
1. Maxillary artery, which enters the gap to reach the 
pterygopalatine fossa through pterygomaxillary fissure.
2. Buccal nerve, a branch of mandibular nerve. It comes 
out through the gap to provide sensory innervation to 
the skin and mucus membrane of the cheek.
Medial Pterygoid (Fig. 10.6)
The medial pterygoid is a thick quadrilateral muscle and 
consists of two heads: superficial and deep.
Origin
1. The small superficial head (a small slip of muscle) arises 
from maxillary tuberosity and lateral surface of the 
pyramidal process of palatine bone.
2. The large deep head (forming the bulk of muscle) arises 
from medial surface of the lateral pterygoid plate and 
grooved surface of the pyramidal process of palatine 
bone.
Fig. 10.5 Relation of the lateral pterygoid muscle.
Maxillary
artery
Pterygomaxillary
fissure
Deep temporal
arteries
Deep temporal nerves
Masseteric nerve
Structures
passing
through
the gap
between
the two
heads
Structures emerging at the upper border
Lingual nerve
Inferior alveolar
artery and nerve
Structures emerging at the lower border
Middle meningeal
artery
Maxillary
artery
Masseteric
artery
Buccal
nerve
Fig. 10.6 Origin and insertion of the medial pterygoid 
muscle.
Deep head of medial pterygoid
Superficial head of
medial pterygoid
Lateral pterygoid
plate
Maxillary tuberosity
--- Page 151 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
Insertion
The fibres run downwards, backwards, and laterally to be 
inserted by a strong tendinous lamina into a roughened area 
on the posteroinferior part of the medial surface and angle 
of ramus of mandible as high as the mandibular foramen 
and as forwards as the mylohyoid groove (Fig. 9.11).
Nerve supply
The medial pterygoid is supplied by a nerve to medial 
pterygoid, a branch from the main trunk of the mandibular 
nerve.
Relations
Superficial (Fig. 10.7):
1. Lingual nerve.
2. Inferior alveolar nerve.
3. Inferior alveolar vessels.
Deep:
1. Levator palati and tensor palati muscles.
2. Superior constrictor of pharynx.
3. Styloglossus and stylopharyngeus muscles.
Actions
1. Medial pterygoids of two sides elevate the mandible to 
help in closing of mouth.
2. Acting with lateral pterygoids, the medial pterygoids 
protrude the mandible.
3. When medial and lateral pterygoids of one side act 
together, the corresponding side of the mandible is 
rotated forwards and to the opposite side.
4. Lateral and medial pterygoids of two sides when contract 
alternately produce side-to-side movements, which are 
used to grind the food.
BLOOD VESSELS
MAXILLARY ARTERY (Figs 10.7 and 10.8)
The maxillary artery is the larger terminal branch of the 
external carotid artery.
It arises behind the neck of the mandible, runs horizontally 
forward up to the lower border of lower head of lateral 
pterygoid. Now it turns upwards and forwards, crosses the 
lower head of lateral pterygoid superficially (sometimes 
deep). After emerging between the two heads of lateral 
pterygoid it enters the pterygopalatine fossa by passing 
Fig. 10.7 Superficial relations of the medial pterygoid muscle.
Buccal artery
Lingual nerve
Inferior alveolar nerve
Inferior alveolar artery
Maxillary artery
Superficial
temporal
artery
Anterior tympanic artery
Deep auricular
artery
Middle meningeal artery
Accessory middle
meningeal artery
Masseteric artery
Deep temporal
arteries
Fig. 10.8 Branches of the maxillary artery.
Mylohyoid artery
Inferior alveolar artery
Deep auricular artery
Anterior tympanic artery
Middle meningeal artery
Accessory middle
meningeal artery
Masseteric artery
Deep temporal arteries
Pharyngeal artery
Artery of pterygoid canal
Sphenopalatine artery
Infraorbital artery
Anterior superior alveolar artery
Posterior superior alveolar artery
Greater palatine artery
Lesser palatine arteries
Buccal artery
Lingual branch
Incisive branches
Mental artery
--- Page 152 ---
Infratemporal Fossa, Temporomandibular Joint, and Pterygopalatine Fossa
through pterygomaxillary fissure. Here it ends by giving its 
terminal branches.
The maxillary artery has a wide territory of distribution. 
It supplies:
(a) upper and lower jaws,
(b) muscles of temporal and infratemporal fossae,
(c) nose and paranasal sinuses,
(d) palate and roof of pharynx,
(e) external and middle ear, 
(f) pharyngotympanic tube, and
(g) dura mater.
N.B. The maxillary artery enters the infratemporal fossa by 
passing forwards, between the neck of mandible and the 
sphenomandibular ligament.
Parts and Relations
The maxillary artery is divided into three parts by the lower 
head of lateral pterygoid muscle. The parts are:
1. First part (mandibular part): From beginning (origin) 
to lower border of lateral pterygoid. It lies between the 
neck of the mandible laterally and sphenomandibular 
ligament medially. The auriculotemporal nerve lies 
above this part.
2. Second part (pterygoid part): From lower border to the 
upper border of the lower head of lateral pterygoid (i.e., 
second part lies on or deep to lower head of lateral 
pterygoid).
3. Third part (pterygopalatine part): From upper border 
of the lower head of lateral pterygoid to pterygopalatine 
fossa. In pterygopalatine fossa it lies in front of the 
pterygopalatine ganglion.
N.B.
• Most of the branches from the first and second parts of 
maxillary artery accompany the branches of the 
mandibular nerve.
• Branches from the third part of the maxillary artery 
accompany the branches of maxillary nerve and 
pterygopalatine ganglion.
• Branches from the second part of the maxillary artery are 
muscular only and supply muscles of mastication.
• All the branches (1st and 3rd part) of the maxillary artery 
pass through bony foramina and fissures except branches 
from its second part.
Branches of the Maxillary Artery (Fig. 10.8)
I. Branches from the First Part (Five Branches)
1. Deep auricular artery—passes upwards and backwards 
to enter the external acoustic meatus by piercing its floor 
and supplies:
(a) skin of external acoustic meatus, and
(b) outer surfaces of tympanic membrane.
2. Anterior tympanic artery—enters the tympanic cavity 
by passing through petrotympanic fissure and it supplies 
the inner surface of the tympanic membrane.
3. Middle meningeal artery—is the largest meningeal 
branch. It supplies meninges as well as the skull bone.
Clinically it is the most important branch of the 
maxillary artery.
The middle meningeal artery arises from the first part 
of the maxillary artery. It ascends upwards deep to the 
lateral pterygoid, behind the mandibular nerve. Passing 
between the two roots of the auriculotemporal nerve, to 
enter the cranial cavity through foramen spinosum in 
company with meningeal branch of mandibular nerve 
(nervus spinosus).
As it emerges in the cranial cavity, it courses laterally 
on the floor of the middle cranial fossa and turns 
upwards and forwards on the greater wing of the 
sphenoid, where it divides into frontal and parietal 
branches:
(a) Frontal (anterior) branch, courses up towards the 
pterion and then curves backwards to ascend 
towards the vertex, lying over the precentral gyrus 
of the cerebral hemisphere. In the region of pterion 
the artery frequently lies in a bony tunnel in the 
parietal bone for a centimeter or more.
(b) Parietal (posterior) branches arch backwards on the 
squamous part of the temporal bone, cross the 
lower border of the parietal bone in front of its 
mastoid angle; here it divides into branches, which 
spread out as far as lambda. It lies along the superior 
temporal gyrus.
Distribution: The middle meningeal artery and its branches 
lie outside the dura and deep to the inner surface of the 
skull. Both of these are supplied by the artery.
N.B. The middle meningeal artery and its branches are 
accompanied by corresponding veins, which lie between 
the artery and the bone.
4. Accessory middle meningeal artery—runs upwards and 
enters the cranial cavity through foramen ovale.
It supplies meninges and structures in the 
infratemporal fossa.
5. Inferior 
alveolar/dental 
artery—runs 
downwards 
between the sphenomandibular ligament and the ramus 
of the mandible, enters the mandibular foramen, runs 
through the mandibular canal, supplies molar and 
premolar teeth and adjoining gum. It then divides into 
mental and incisive branches.
The incisive branch supplies the canine and incisor 
teeth. The mental artery emerges through the mental 
foramen to supply the skin of the chin. Before entering 
the mandibular foramen the inferior alveolar artery 
gives off two branches, namely,
--- Page 153 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
(a) Lingual branch: accompanies the lingual nerve and 
supply the mucous membrane of the cheek.
(b) Mylohyoid branch: pierces the lower end of the 
sphenomandibular ligament, passes downwards 
and forwards to run in the mylohyoid groove. It 
supplies the mylohyoid muscle.
II. Branches from the Second Part (Four Branches)
1. Deep temporal arteries (usually two in number)—
ascend up on the lateral aspect of the skull deep to the 
temporalis muscle, which they supply.
2. Pterygoid branches—supply the medial and lateral 
pterygoid muscles.
3. Masseteric 
artery—passes 
laterally 
through 
mandibular notch and supplies the masseter muscle 
from its deep surface.
4. Buccal artery—supplies buccinator muscle.
III. Branches from the Third Part (Six Branches)
1. Posterior superior alveolar artery arises from maxillary 
artery just before it enters the pterygomaxillary fissure. 
It divides into two or three branches, which enter the 
foramina on the posterior surface of the body of 
maxilla, runs into alveolar canals and supply the molar 
and premolar teeth and mucus membrane of maxillary 
air sinus.
2. Infraorbital artery also arises from maxillary artery just 
before it reaches the pterygopalatine fossa. The artery 
passes successively through inferior orbital fissure, 
infraorbital groove, and infraorbital canal, and appears 
on the face through the infraorbital foramen. It gives the 
following branches:
In the orbit:
(a) Branches to orbital contents.
(b) Middle superior alveolar artery to premolar teeth.
(c) Anterior superior alveolar artery, which descends 
through canaliculus sinuosus in the anterior wall of 
the maxillary sinus. It supplies the maxillary air 
sinus, and canine and incisor teeth of the upper jaw.
In the face, It gives off branches to supply the lacrimal 
sac, medial angle of the eye, side of nose, and upper lip.
3. Greater palatine artery passes downwards in the 
greater palatine canal and appears in the oral cavity at 
the posterolateral corner of the hard palate through the 
greater palatine foramen. Now it runs forwards in the 
groove along the alveolar arch to the incisive fossa 
where it enters the lateral incisive canal to enter the 
nasal cavity. It supplies the roof of the mouth and 
adjoining gum, while in the greater palatine canal the 
artery gives off lesser palatine arteries that emerge 
through foramina of the same name and supply the 
soft palate and tonsil.
4. Pharyngeal artery passes backwards through the 
palatovaginal canal and supplies the mucus membrane 
of the nasopharynx, auditory tube, and the sphenoidal 
air sinus.
5. Artery of pterygoid canal runs backwards in the 
pterygoid canal and supplies the pharynx, auditory tube, 
and the tympanic cavity.
6. Sphenopalatine 
artery 
considered 
continuation of the maxillary artery. It is the most 
important branch of the third part of the maxillary 
artery. It enters the nasal cavity in the posterior part of 
the superior meatus through sphenopalatine foramen. 
Here it divides into:
(a) posterior lateral nasal, and
(b) posterior septal branches.
The posterior lateral nasal branches supply the 
lateral wall of the nose and sphenoidal and ethmoidal 
air sinuses, the posterior septal branches cross the 
undersurface of the body of the sphenoid, and then 
pass forwards and downwards along the nasal septum. 
One of the branches of this group is long, runs in a 
groove on the vomer towards the incisive canal and 
anastomoses with the terminal branch of the greater 
palatine artery.
The branches of maxillary artery are summarized in 
Table 10.1.
Table 10.1 Branches of the maxillary artery
First part
Second part
Third part
Branches
Five
Four
Deep auricular artery
Deep temporal
Posterior superior alveolar (dental) artery
Anterior tympanic artery
Pterygoid branches
Infraorbital artery
Middle meningeal artery
Masseteric artery
Greater palatine artery
Accessory meningeal artery
Buccal artery
Pharyngeal artery
Inferior alveolar artery
Artery of pterygoid canal
Sphenopalatine artery
--- Page 154 ---
Infratemporal Fossa, Temporomandibular Joint, and Pterygopalatine Fossa
MAXILLARY VEIN AND PTERYGOID VENOUS PLEXUS
Maxillary Vein
It is a short venous trunk, which accompanies the first part 
of the maxillary artery. It is formed by the confluence of 
veins from the pterygoid venous plexus and passes 
backwards between the sphenomandibular ligament and 
the neck of the mandible. Within the parotid gland it unites 
with 
superficial 
temporal 
vein 
form 
retromandibular vein.
Pterygoid Venous Plexus
It is a network of very small veins that lie around and within 
the lateral pterygoid muscle.
The pterygoid venous plexus communicates:
(a) with inferior ophthalmic vein via inferior orbital fissure,
(b) with cavernous sinus by emissary veins via foramen 
ovale or foramen of Vesalius, and
(c) with facial vein through the deep facial vein.
The plexus is drained by maxillary vein which is formed at 
the lower border of the lateral pterygoid muscle.
N.B. The pterygoid venous plexus is sometimes referred to 
as a peripheral heart for during yawning when the mouth is 
widely open due to contraction of lateral pterygoid muscle, 
the stagnant venous blood is pumped up into the cavernous 
sinus and maxillary vein. Possibly this is the reason why 
people yawn in the morning when they get up from sleep.
NEURAL STRUCTURES
The infratemporal fossa contains the mandibular 
nerve and its branches, chorda tympani nerve, and otic 
ganglion.
MANDIBULAR NERVE (Fig. 10.9)
The mandibular nerve is the largest of the three divisions of 
the trigeminal nerve. It is a mixed nerve, consisting of both 
sensory and motor fibres. It is a nerve of the first pharyngeal 
arch, hence supplies all the structures derived from this arch, 
e.g., muscles of mastication.
Course and Relations
The mandibular nerve is the largest of three divisions of 
trigeminal nerve. It begins in the middle cranial fossa as 
two roots: a larger sensory root and a smaller motor root. 
The large sensory root arises from lateral convex part of 
the trigeminal ganglion and immediately leaves the cranial 
cavity by passing through foramen ovale to enter the 
infratemporal fossa. The small motor root arises from the 
pons, lies deep to the trigeminal ganglion and the sensory 
root. It also passes through foramen ovale to join the 
sensory root just below the foramen ovale in the 
infratemporal fossa, thus forming the main trunk. The 
mandibular nerve trunk is short and after a short course 
divides into a small anterior and large posterior division.
Fig. 10.9 Course and distribution of the mandibular nerve (SM = submandibular ganglion).
Tensor tympani
Nerve to mylohyoid muscle
Mylohyoid nerve
Inferior alveolar nerve
Chorda tympani nerve
Middle meningeal artery
Lingual nerve
Auriculotemporal nerve
Nervus spinosus
Motor root
Sensory root
Trigeminal ganglion
Nerve to medial pterygoid
Tensor palati
Medial pterygoid
Otic ganglion
Masseteric nerve
Deep temporal nerves
Nerve to lateral pterygoid
Buccal nerve
Submandibular duct
Incisive branch
Mental nerve
Nerve to anterior belly of digastric muscle
--- Page 155 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
Relations of Trunk of Mandibular Nerve in the 
Infratemporal Fossa
Medial: 
Tensor palati muscle and otic ganglion.
Lateral: 
Upper head of lateral pterygoid muscle.
Posterior: Middle meningeal artery.
Anterior: Posterior border of lateral pterygoid plate.
Branches
From the Main Trunk
Two branches arise from the main trunk, a sensory branch 
(nervus spinosus) and a motor branch (nerve to medial 
pterygoid):
1. Nervus spinosus (meningeal branch): It takes a 
recurrent course to enter the cranial cavity through 
foramen spinosum with middle meningeal artery and 
supplies the dura mater of the middle cranial fossa.
Nerve to medial pterygoid: It arises from the medial 
aspect of the main trunk, close to the otic ganglion 
traverses through the ganglion and supplies the medial 
pterygoid from its deep aspect. In addition to medial 
pterygoid it also supplies tensor palati and tensor tympani 
muscles.
From the Anterior Division
The anterior division is mainly motor and gives branches 
to all muscles of mastication except medial pterygoid, 
which is supplied by nerve to medial pterygoid from the 
main trunk. The branches from the anterior divisions are 
as follows:
1. Masseteric nerve: It emerges at the upper border of the 
lateral pterygoid, just in front of the temporomandibular 
joint, passes laterally through the mandibular notch, 
along with masseteric artery to supply the masseter from 
its deeper aspect. It also supplies the temporomandibular 
joint.
2. Deep temporal nerves: These are usually two in 
number, anterior and posterior. The anterior and 
posterior temporal nerves emerge at the upper border 
of the lateral pterygoid and ascend up in the temporal 
fossa to supply the temporalis muscle from its deep 
aspect.
3. Nerve to lateral pterygoid: It runs with the buccal nerve 
and enters the deep surfaces of both the heads of lateral 
pterygoid muscle, which it supplies.
4. Buccal nerve: It contains all the sensory fibres of the 
anterior division. It emerges between the two heads of 
the lateral pterygoid and courses downwards and 
forwards onto the buccinator muscle, giving branches to 
the skin of the cheek. It then pierces the buccinator 
muscle and supplies the mucus membrane of the cheek 
and gum of the lower jaw opposite the molars and 
second premolar teeth.
N.B. All the branches of anterior division of the mandibular 
nerve are motor except buccal nerve which is sensory.
From the Posterior Division
The posterior division is mainly sensory. It gives the 
following three branches:
1. Auriculotemporal nerve: This nerve arises by two roots, 
which after encircling the middle meningeal artery unite to 
form the single trunk. It runs backwards between the neck of 
the mandible and the sphenomandibular ligament. Behind 
the neck of the mandible, it turns upwards and ascends over 
the root of zygoma to enter the temple behind the superficial 
temporal vessels.
Distribution:
(a) Its auricular branches supply skin of the tragus, upper 
part of the pinna, external auditory meatus and 
tympanic membrane. The lower parts of these regions 
are supplied by great auricular nerve and auricular 
branch of the vagus nerve.
(b) Its articular branches supply the temporomandibular joint.
(c) Its superficial temporal branches supply the skin of the 
temple.
(d) It also supplies secretomotor fibres to the parotid gland.
2. Lingual nerve: It is the smaller terminal branch of 
posterior division of the mandibular nerve. It is sensory to 
the mucus membrane of anterior two-third of the tongue 
except vallate papillae.
Course and relations: It begins about 1 cm below the skull. It 
runs first between tensor palati and lateral pterygoid and 
then between lateral and medial pterygoids. About 2 cm 
below the skull it is joined by the chorda tympani nerve. 
After emerging at the lower border of the lateral pterygoid, it 
first run downwards and forwards between the ramus of the 
mandible and medial pterygoid, comes in direct contact with 
the mandible where the bone is thinned to form a shallow 
groove below and medial to the last molar tooth, just above 
the posterior end of the mylohyoid line. This groove separates 
the attachments of pterygomandibular raphe above and 
mylohyoid muscle below. It enters the mouth on the superior 
surface of the mylohyoid, and then it crosses the styloglossus 
to reach the lateral surface of the hyoglossus. Finally it lies on 
the surface of the genioglossus. Here it winds round the 
submandibular duct (first above, then lateral, then below 
and finally medial to the duct) and divides into its terminal 
branches.
Distribution:
(a) Provides sensory supply to floor of mouth, lingual 
surface of the gum and anterior two-third of the tongue;
(b) Carries preganglionic secretomotor fibres to submandibular 
and sublingual salivary glands.
--- Page 156 ---
Infratemporal Fossa, Temporomandibular Joint, and Pterygopalatine Fossa
3. Inferior alveolar nerve: It is the larger terminal branch 
of the posterior division of mandibular nerve. It is a mixed 
nerve. It receives all the motor fibres of the trigeminal 
nerve.
Course: It emerges below the lower head of the lateral 
pterygoid and passes vertically downwards and forward on 
the medial pterygoid. The nerve lies anterior to inferior 
alveolar vessels between the sphenomandibular ligament 
and the ramus of the mandible. Then enters the mandibular 
foramen in company with inferior alveolar artery, traverses 
the mandibular canal as far as mental foramen, where it 
terminates by dividing into mental and incisive branches.
Branches:
(a) Nerve to mylohyoid arises from the inferior alveolar 
nerve before it enters the mandibular canal. It pierces 
the sphenomandibular ligament to reach the mylohyoid 
groove. It supplies mylohyoid and anterior belly of 
digastric muscle.
(b) Dental branches supply molar and premolar teeth.
(c) Mental nerve emerges out through mental foramen to 
supply skin of the chin and skin and mucus membrane 
of the lower lip.
(d) Incisive branch, supplies canine and incisor teeth.
The branches of the mandibular nerve are summarized in 
Table 10.2.
Table 10.2 Branches of the mandibular nerve
From main trunk
From anterior 
division
From posterior 
division
Nervus spinosus 
(meningeal
branch)
Masseteric nerve
Auriculotemporal 
nerve
Nerve to medial 
pterygoid
Deep temporal 
nerves
Lingual nerve
Nerve to lateral 
pterygoid
Inferior alveolar nerve
Buccal nerve
N.B. All the branches of posterior division of the mandibular 
nerve are sensory except nerve to mylohyoid, which is 
motor.
• Inferior alveolar nerve block (generally called inferior 
alveolar block or 1A block): It is the most common nerve 
block performed in dentistry to carry out dental procedures 
on the mandibular teeth.
Clinical correlation
The anesthetic agent is injected slightly superior to the 
entry of inferior alveolar nerve into the mandibular foramen 
being overhung by the lingula. While performing inferior 
alveolar nerve block, if needle is inserted too far posteriorly, 
it may enter the parotid gland and damage the facial nerve 
leading to transient facial palsy.
• The lingual nerve is at great risk (10%) during surgical 
removal of the impacted third molar teeth. The nerve is 
also at risk during surgical removal of the submandibular 
salivary gland, during which the submandibular duct must 
be dissected out carefully from the nerve.
• Referred Pain: It is the pain frequently referred from one 
branch of mandibular nerve to the other. Thus in patients 
suffering from tongue cancer, the pain radiates to the ear 
and to the temporal fossa in the area of distribution of 
auriculo-temporal nerve. The pain is relieved by dividing 
the lingual nerve below and behind the last molar tooth. At 
this site the nerve is in contact with the mandible and 
covered only by mucus membrane. Similarly, pain from 
teeth is also referred to the ear and temporal region.
CHORDA TYMPANI NERVE
The chorda tympani nerve is the slender branch of facial 
nerve. It is so named because of its intimate relationship to 
the middle ear (tympanum).
Function Components (Fig. 10.10)
The chorda tympani nerve contains:
General visceral efferent fibres: These are preganglionic 
parasympathetic (secretomotor) fibres to submandibular 
and sublingual salivary glands.
Special visceral afferent fibres: These fibres carry taste 
sensations from anterior 2/3rd of tongue (except vallate 
papillae).
Origin, Course, and Relations (Fig. 10.11)
It arises from facial nerve in the facial canal about 6 mm 
above the stylomastoid foramen, within the posterior wall 
of the tympanic (middle ear) cavity. It enters the middle ear 
through the posterior canaliculus of chorda tympani in the 
posterior wall, runs across the lateral wall (tympanic 
membrane). Here it crosses medial aspect of handle of 
malleus and lateral aspect of long process of incus. At the 
anterior margin of tympanic membrane it enters anterior 
canaliculus in the anterior wall of the middle ear passes 
through canaliculus and emerges at the base of skull 
through medial end of petrotympanic fissure. It then goes 
medially, forwards and downwards, grooves the medial side 
of the spine of the sphenoid, running anteroinferiorly deep 
to lateral pterygoid to join the posterior aspect of the 
lingual nerve about 2 cm below the base of the skull.
--- Page 157 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
Distribution
1. It supplies secretomotor fibres to submandibular and 
sublingual glands through the submandibular ganglion.
2. It carries taste sensations from anterior two-third of the 
tongue (except vallate papillae).
OTIC GANGLION (Fig. 10.12)
It is a small parasympathetic ganglion connected to the 
mandibular division of trigeminal nerve and provides a relay 
station to the secretomotor fibres to the parotid gland. 
Topographically, it is intimately related to the mandibular 
nerve but functionally it is related to glossopharyngeal nerve.
Size
Pinhead (2–3 mm in size).
Location
Infratemporal fossa, just below the foramen ovale.
Relations
Lateral: 
Mandibular nerve.
Medial: 
Tensor palati muscle.
Posterior: Middle meningeal artery.
Anterior: Medial pterygoid muscle.
Roots or Connections
1. Parasympathetic motor (secretomotor): From lesser 
petrosal nerve.
Preganglionic parasympathetic fibres arise from 
inferior salivatory nucleus; pass successively through 
glossopharyngeal 
nerve, 
tympanic 
branch 
glossopharyngeal nerve (Jacobson’s nerve), tympanic 
plexus, and lesser petrosal nerve to relay in the ganglion. 
Postganglionic parasympathetic fibres from ganglion 
cells pass through auriculo-temporal nerve to supply 
parotid gland.
2. Sympathetic: From sympathetic plexus around the 
middle meningeal artery.
Fig. 10.10 Functional components of the chorda tympani nerve.
Superior salivatory nucleus
Nucleus tractus solitarius
Facial nerve
Geniculate
ganglion
General visceral
efferent (secretomotor)
fibres
Lingual nerve
Special visceral
afferent (taste) fibres
Sublingual gland
Submandibular gland
Submandibular ganglion
Chorda tympani 
nerve
Fig. 10.11 Origin, course, and relations of the chorda tympani nerve.
Posterior canaliculus of
chorda tympani
Facial canal
Facial nerve
Stylomastoid foramen
Incus
Malleus
Chorda tympani nerve
Anterior canaliculus of
chorda tympani
Spine of sphenoid
Auriculotemporal nerve
Lingual nerve
Inferior
alveolar nerve
Mandibular nerve
Petrotympanic 
fissure
--- Page 158 ---
Infratemporal Fossa, Temporomandibular Joint, and Pterygopalatine Fossa
Preganglionic sympathetic fibres arise from T1 and T2 
spinal segments, enter the cervical sympathetic chain at 
the level of its inferior ganglion and then ascend to relay 
in the superior cervical sympathetic ganglion. The 
postganglionic fibres arise from this ganglion and form 
plexus around the middle meningeal artery. They then 
pass through the ganglion without relay to reach the 
parotid gland via auriculotemporal nerve. They are 
vasomotor in nature and responsible for thick salivary 
secretion.
3. Sensory: From auriculotemporal nerve.
4. Somatic motor: Nerve to medial pterygoid. It passes 
through ganglion to supply medial pterygoid, tensor 
palati, and tensor tympani muscles.
Branches
1. Postganglionic 
parasympathetic
All supply parotid gland 
through auriculotemporal nerve
2. Postganglionic 
sympathetic
3. Sensory
N.B. 
• In humans, the chorda tympani nerve is connected to the 
otic ganglion and nerve to pterygoid canal. These 
connections provide an alternative pathway of taste 
sensations from anterior two-third of the tongue.
• Clinical evidence suggests that in humans the parotid 
gland also receives secretomotor fibres through chorda 
tympani nerve.
TEMPOROMANDIBULAR JOINT
The temporomandibular joint (TMJ), one on each side of 
the head, is a joint between temporal bone and mandible 
that allows the movements of the mandible for speech and 
mastication.
The mandible is a single bone having two heads, which 
articulate on each side with temporal bone of cranium. The 
cranium, with which the mandible articulates, is also, 
mechanically a single component. The movement cannot take 
place at one temporomandibular joint without a concomitant 
movement occurring at the joint on the opposite side. 
Therefore, temporomandibular joints are the bilateral 
components of a single craniomandibular articulation/joint.
The temporomandibular joints are often involved in various 
disease processes. Therefore medical students, particularly 
dental students need to understand the anatomy of TMJ, 
including movements and disorders associated with the joint.
Type: It is a synovial joint of condylar variety.
Fig. 10.12 Otic ganglion and its connections.
Parotid gland
Superior cervical sympathetic ganglion
Glossopharyngeal nerve
Inferior salivatory
nucleus in medulla
Tympanic branch of
glossopharyngeal nerve
(Jacobson’s nerve)
Tympanic plexus
Lesser petrosal nerve
Foramen ovale
Mandibular nerve
Nerve to medial pterygoid 
To tensor tympani
To tensor palati
To medial pterygoid
Otic ganglion
Middle meningeal
artery
Auriculo-temporal
nerve
--- Page 159 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
Articular Surface
The upper articular surface is formed by the (a) articular 
fossa, and (b) articular eminence of the temporal bone. This 
surface is concavo-convex from behind forwards (Fig. 10.13).
The lower articular surface is formed by the head 
(condyle) of the mandible. This surface is elliptical in shape.
The articular surfaces are covered by fibrocartilage and 
not by hyaline cartilage, hence temporomandibular joint is 
an atypical synovial joint (Fig. 10.13).
JOINT CAVITY (Fig. 10.14)
The cavity of temporomandibular joint is divided into 
upper menisco-temporal and lower menisco-mandibular 
compartments by an intra-articular disc of fibrocartilage.
The upper compartment permits gliding movements, 
whereas lower compartment permits gliding as well as 
rotational movements.
Articular Disc
The articular disc is an oval plate of fibrocartilage. Though 
termed fibrocartilage, it consists mainly of collagen fibres 
with few cartilage cells. It is congruent with both the 
articular surfaces. Thus its upper surface is concavo-convex 
(from before backwards) and its inferior surface is concave. 
The concavo-convex superior surface fits against the 
articular eminence and the concavity of the articular fossa. 
The lower concave surface fits with convex head of the 
mandible.
The periphery of the disc is attached firmly to the fibrous 
capsule.
The disc has a thick margin, the peripheral annulus and a 
central depression on its inferior surface. In sagittal section, 
the disc appears to possess a thin intermediate zone and 
thickened anterior and posterior bands (Fig. 10.14). The 
anterior band extends anteriorly through the capsule to be 
continuous with the tendon of lateral pterygoid. The 
posterior band splits into two laminae: upper and lower. The 
upper lamina composed of fibroelastic tissue is attached to 
the squamotympanic fissure. The lower lamina composed of 
fibrous non-elastic tissue is attached to the back of the 
condyle. The bilaminar region contains a venous plexus. The 
central part of the disc is avascular.
The elastic fibres in the posterior part of the disc bring 
back the disc in the articular fossa when the open mouth is 
closed.
N.B. Parts of articular disc (Fig. 10.14): In sagittal section, 
the articular disc of TMJ presents five different parts, from 
before backwards these are: (a) anterior extension, 
(b) anterior thick band, (c) intermediate zone, (d) posterior 
thick band, and (e) posterior bilaminar zone.
LIGAMENTS
The ligaments are the fibrous capsule, temporomandibular, 
sphenomandibular, and stylomandibular ligaments. The 
latter two are accessory ligaments (Fig. 10.15A and B).
1. Fibrous capsule: It is a fibrous sac to enclose the 
joint cavity. It is attached above to the articular tubercle, 
circumference 
articular 
fossa, 
squamotympanic fissure; and below to the neck of 
mandible.
The capsule is loose above the intra-articular disc and 
tight below it.
The synovial membrane lines the inner aspect of the 
fibrous capsule and the neck of the mandible.
2. Lateral (temporomandibular) ligament: It is a true 
ligament and formed as a result of thickening on the 
lateral aspect of the capsular ligament. Its fibres are 
directed downwards and backwards. It is attached above 
to the articular tubercle on the root of zygoma and 
below to the posterolateral aspect of the neck of the 
mandible. The lateral ligament strengthens the lateral 
aspect of the capsule.
Fig. 10.13 Articular surfaces of the temporomandibular 
joint.
Head (condyle) of 
mandible
Tympanic plate
Lower
compartment
Upper
compartment
of joint cavity
Articular eminence
Articular fossa
Intra-articular disc
Fig. 10.14 Parts of the intra-articular disc.
Lateral pterygoid muscle
Lower lamina of
posterior band
Fibrous
capsule
Anterior band
Anterior extension
Intermediate
thin zone
Posterior band
Upper lamina of
posterior band
--- Page 160 ---
Infratemporal Fossa, Temporomandibular Joint, and Pterygopalatine Fossa
3. Sphenomandibular ligament: It is attached above to the 
spine of the sphenoid and below to the lingula and lower 
margin of the mandibular foramen of the mandible. It 
lies on a deeper plane away from the joint capsule. The 
sphenomandibular ligament represents the unossified 
intermediate part of the sheath of the Meckel’s cartilage 
of the first pharyngeal arch. It becomes accentuated and 
taut when the mandible is protruded.
Relations of sphenomandibular ligament (Fig. 10.16A 
and B) are as under:
Laterally, it is related to: (a) lateral pterygoid muscle, 
(b) auriculo-temporal nerve, (c) maxillary artery, and 
(d) inferior alveolar nerve and vessels.
Medially, it is related to: (a) medial pterygoid, (b) chorda 
tympani nerve and (c) wall of the pharynx.
N.B. Near its lower end the sphenomandibular ligament is 
pierced by mylohyoid nerve and vessels.
The sphenomandibular ligament is an important landmark 
for administration of local anesthetic during inferior alveolar 
nerve block.
Clinical correlation
4. Stylomandibular ligament: It is attached above to the 
lateral surface of the styloid process and below to the 
Fig. 10.15 Ligaments of the tempor omandibular joint: A, fibrous capsule and lateral ligament; B, accessory ligaments.
Lateral
(temporomandibular)
ligament
Articular tubercle
Fibrous capsule
Styloid process
Sphenomandibular
ligament
Spine of
sphenoid
Stylomandibular
ligament
Styloid
process
Lingula
Fig. 10.16 Relations of the sphenomandibular ligament: A, superficial relations; B, deep relations.
Foramen ovale
Anterior division of
mandibular nerve
Lingual nerve
Foramen
spinosum
Spine of sphenoid
Superficial temporal
artery
Middle meningeal
artery
Auriculotemporal
nerve
Maxillary artery
Sphenomandibular
ligament
Inferior alveolar
artery
Inferior alveolar
nerve
Medial pterygoid
muscle
Mylohyoid nerve and
vessels
Wall of pharynx
Sphenomandibular
ligament
Chorda tympani
nerve
Spine of sphenoid
Middle meningeal
artery
Auriculotemporal
nerve
Temporal
bone
Maxillary artery
Inferior alveolar
artery
Inferior alveolar
nerve
--- Page 161 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
angle and adjoining posterior border of the ramus of the 
mandible.
The stylomandibular ligament is formed due to 
thickening of the investing layer of deep cervical fascia, 
which separates the parotid and submandibular glands.
This ligament also becomes taut when the mandible 
is protruded.
N.B. The accessory ligaments of temporomandibular 
joints control range of motion (ROM) of TMJs and with 
mandible form a ‘swing’ (Fig. 10.17).
RELATIONS
Lateral:
(a) Skin and fasciae.
(b) Parotid gland.
(c) Temporal branches of the facial nerve.
Medial:
(a) Tympanic plate separating it from internal carotid 
artery.
(b) Spine of sphenoid.
(c) Auriculotemporal nerve.
(d) Middle meningeal artery.
(e) Sphenomandibular ligament.
(f) Chorda tympani nerve.
Anterior:
(a) Tendon of lateral pterygoid.
(b) Masseteric nerve and vessels.
Posterior:
(a) Postglenoid part of parotid gland separating it from 
external auditory meatus.
(b) Superficial temporal vessels.
(c) Auriculotemporal nerve.
NERVE SUPPLY
1. Auriculotemporal nerve: Its articular twigs enter the joint 
from its posterior aspect.
2. Masseteric nerve: Its articular twigs enter the joint from 
its anterior aspect.
BLOOD SUPPLY
1. Maxillary artery.
2. Superficial temporal artery.
The articular twigs of these arteries enter the posterior aspect 
of the capsule.
LYMPHATIC DRAINAGE
The lymph from temporomandibular joint is drained into:
1. Superficial parotid (preauricular) nodes.
2. Deep parotid nodes.
3. Upper deep cervical nodes.
STABILITY
The joint is much more stable when the mouth is closed (i.e., 
when the teeth are in occlusion) than when the mouth is 
open. In occlusion, the teeth themselves stabilize the 
mandible on maxilla and no strain is thrown on the joints 
when an upward blow is received on the mandible. Further 
in the occluded position, the forward movement of condyle 
is discouraged by the articular eminence and by the 
contraction of the posterior fibres of the temporalis muscle, 
while the backward movement of the condyle is prevented by 
the lateral ligament and the contraction of the lateral 
pterygoid muscle.
MOVEMENTS OF THE MANDIBLE
When the TMJ of two sides are in position of rest a small free 
space exists between the upper and lower teeth but lips are in 
contact. The various movements of mandible occur in this 
position.
The lower jaw can be depressed, elevated, protruded 
retracted and moved from side-to-side, by movements at 
temporomandibular joints. 
Mechanism
All of the above mentioned movements of lower jaw involve 
two basic movements, which occur at TMJ, of course with 
the help of muscles:
1. Gliding movement.
2. Rotational movement.
Fig. 10.17 ‘Swing’ formed by the mandible and accessory 
ligaments of TMJs.
Stylomandibular
ligament
Sphenomandibular
ligament
--- Page 162 ---
Infratemporal Fossa, Temporomandibular Joint, and Pterygopalatine Fossa
The upper menisco-temporal compartment of TMJ permits 
gliding movements, during protraction (protrusion), 
retraction, and chewing.
lower menisco-temporal compartment permits 
rotation around two axes (a) a transverse axis, during 
depression and elevation and (b) a vertical axis during 
side-to-side/chewing movements.
With these two types of movements, gliding and rotation, 
and with right and left TMJs working together, most of the 
movements of the lower jaw can be accomplished perfectly 
as desired. These include opening and closing the jaws and 
shifting the lower jaw to one side (Fig. 10.18).
The movements occurring at the temporomandibular 
joints are:
1. Depression
2. Elevation
3. Protraction
4. Retraction
5. Side to side (Chewing) movements
1. Depression (lowering of jaw to open mouth): During 
depression, the head of mandible along with an articular 
disc glide forward in the upper meniscotemporal 
compartment on both the sides by the contraction of 
lateral pterygoid muscle. At the same time head rotates 
forward underneath the articular disc by the contraction 
of suprahyoid muscles, viz. digastric geniohyoid, and 
mylohyoid. The gravity also helps in opening the mouth.
2. Elevation (elevating of jaw to close the mouth): During 
elevation the movements take place in a reverse order to 
that of depression, i.e., first the head of mandible along 
with an articular disc glide backward in the upper 
meniscotemporal compartment by temporalis, masseter, 
and medial pterygoid, and then head rotates backward 
on the lower surface of the disc by posterior fibres of 
temporalis.
3. Protrusion/Protraction: 
During 
this 
movement, 
mandibular teeth move forward in front of maxillary 
teeth. In this act, head of mandible along with articular 
disc glide forwards in the upper meniscotemporal 
compartment on both sides by simultaneous action of 
medial and lateral pterygoids of both sides.
Retraction: During this movement, the head of mandible 
along with articular disc glide backwards in the upper 
meniscotemporal compartment by the contraction of 
the posterior fibres of temporalis muscle and bring the 
joint in the resting position. The forceful retraction is 
assisted by deep fibres of masseter, digastric, and 
geniohyoid muscles. At the end of this movement the 
head of the mandible comes to lie underneath the 
articular tubercle.
5. Side-to-side (Chewing) movements: These movements 
occur alternately in the right and left temporomandibular 
joints. In chewing movements, the head of the mandible 
on one side glides forwards along with the disc (as in 
protraction), but the head of the mandible on the 
opposite side merely rotates on the vertical axis. As a 
result, the chin moves forwards and to one side, i.e., 
towards the side on which no gliding has taken place.
During this movement, the medial and lateral pterygoids 
of one side contract alternatively with those of opposite 
sides.
The alternate movements of this kind on the two sides 
result in side-to-side movements of the lower jaw.
Muscles Producing Movements 
Depression (Opening of Mouth)
It is produced mainly by lateral pterygoid helped by gravity. 
The digastric, geniohyoid, and mylohyoid muscles help when 
the mouth is opened widely or against resistance.
Elevation (Closing the Mouth)
It is caused by medial pterygoid, masseter, and temporalis 
(vertical fibres).
N.B. Closing the mouth is stronger action than the opening 
the mouth. Therefore, when attacked by a street dog, it is 
advisable to keep the mouth of dog closed, if possible.
Fig. 10.18 Movements of the lower jaw related to 
temporomandibular joint to show the opening and closing 
of the mouth. Note the changing relation of the condyle of 
the mandible.
Mouth closed
Mouth open
External auditory
meatus
Postglenoid process
Articular fossa
Intra-articular disc
Articular eminence
--- Page 163 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
Protraction
It is done by lateral and medial pterygoids and masseter.
Retraction
It is done by posterior fibres of temporalis. It may be assisted 
by middle and deep fibres of the masseter, the digastric and 
geniohyoid muscles.
Side-to-side (Chewing) Movements
These movements are performed by alternate contraction 
of medial and lateral pterygoids on each side.
Movements of the temporomandibular joint and 
muscles producing them are summarized in Table 10.3.
Table 10.3 Movements of the mandible and muscles 
producing them
Movement
Muscle
Depression
Lateral pterygoid
Digastric
Geniohyoid
Mylohyoid
Gravity
Elevation
Masseter
Medial pterygoid
Temporalis
Protrusion 
(Protraction)
Medial pterygoid
Lateral pterygoid
Retraction
Posterior fibres of temporalis
Side-to-side 
(chewing) 
movement
Medial and lateral pterygoids of one side 
contracting alternatively with that of opposite 
side
• Palpation of the temporomandibular joint and 
associated muscles: The bilateral palpation is must to 
assess the entire joint and its associated muscles. First, the 
patient is asked to open and close the mouth several times. 
Then he is asked to move the opened jaw to left, and to 
right, and finally he is asked to move the jaw forward. For 
digital palpation of condyle of moving mandible place a 
finger into the outer portion of the external auditory 
meatus.
• Dislocation of the mandible (Fig. 10.19): The mandible is 
dislocated only anteriorly. When the mouth is open, the 
mandibular condyles move forward and lie underneath the 
articular eminences. This is the most unstable position of 
the temporomandibular joint. In this position, if there is 
excessive opening of mouth as during yawning, sudden 
violence or convulsive spasm of lateral pterygoid muscles, 
the head of mandible of one or both sides may slip 
anteriorly and get locked into the infratemporal fossa; as a 
result the mouth cannot be closed anymore and any 
passive effort to do that will invariably fracture the neck of 
the mandible on one or both sides.
Clinical correlation
To reduce dislocation, the condyle must be lowered and 
pushed back behind the summit of articular eminence into 
the articular fossa. Thus the reduction is done by depress-
ing the jaw with thumb placed on the last molar teeth, and 
simultaneously elevating the chin.
• Temporomandibular joint syndrome: This syndrome 
consists 
group 
symptoms 
arising 
from 
temporomandibular joints and their associated masticatory 
muscles. The typical presenting symptoms are:
– Diffuse facial pain, due to spasm of masseter muscle.
– Headache, due to spasm of temporalis muscle.
– Jaw pain, due to spasm of lateral pterygoid.
These symptoms may be associated with clicking and 
pain in the joint. The clicking is often audible when the 
patient is chewing. It occurs when the posterior attachment 
of the disc becomes stretched or detached, allowing the 
disc to become temporarily or permanently trapped 
anteriorly. The derangement of articular disc results from 
an overclosure or malocclusion.
• During surgery of temporomandibular joints, the facial 
nerve should be preserved with utmost care.
MUSCLES OF MASTICATION
The muscles of mastication are concerned with movements 
of mandible at the temporomandibular joints during 
mastication (Fig. 10.20).
They are divided into two groups:
1. Principal muscles
(a) Temporalis
(b) Masseter
(c) Lateral pterygoid
(d) Medial pterygoid.
2. Accessory muscles
(a) Digastric
(b) Buccinator
(c) Mylohyoid
(d) Geniohyoid.
Fig. 10.19 Temporomandibular joint: A, normal; B, in 
anterior dislocation.
Head of
mandible
Articular
fossa
Head of
mandible
Articular
eminence
Articular
fossa
Articular
eminence
--- Page 164 ---
Infratemporal Fossa, Temporomandibular Joint, and Pterygopalatine Fossa
Principal Muscles of Mastication
The characteristic features of the principal muscles of 
mastication are as follows:
1. All are located in or around the infratemporal fossa.
2. All are inserted into the ramus of the mandible.
3. All are innervated by the mandibular division of the 
trigeminal nerve.
4. All are concerned with movements of the mandible on 
the temporomandibular joints.
5. All develop from mesoderm of the first pharyngeal arch.
Temporalis (Fig. 10.21)
It is a fan-shaped muscle located in the temporal fossa. It is 
covered by tough temporal fascia which is attached above to 
the temporal line and below to the zygomatic arch.
Origin
It arises from:
1. Whole of the floor of temporal fossa except the part 
formed by the zygomatic bone.
2. Deep surface of the temporal fascia.
Insertion
The fibres converge and descend to form a tendon, which 
passes through the gap between the zygomatic arch and the 
side of the skull. The muscle is inserted into:
1. The medial surface, apex, anterior, border of the 
coronoid process of ramus of mandible.
2. The anterior border of the ramus of mandible, almost 
up to the last molar tooth.
N.B. The temporalis muscle is fan shaped. The anterior 
fibres are oriented vertically, the posteriormost fibres are 
disposed almost horizontally and intervening intermediate 
fibres are placed obliquely.
Nerve supply
The temporalis is supplied by the anterior and posterior deep 
temporal nerves, the branches of the anterior division of the 
mandibular nerve.
Actions
The temporalis muscle elevates the mandible and so closes 
the mouth and approximates the teeth. This movement 
requires both the upward pull of the anterior fibres and 
backward pull of the posterior fibres.
Posterior fibres retract the mandible after it has been 
protruded.
Masseter (Fig. 10.22)
The masseter (Greek: masseter = a chewer) is a thick 
quadrilateral muscle covering the lateral surface of the ramus 
of the mandible including its coronoid process. The condylar 
process is left uncovered.
Origin
The masseter consists of the following three layers:
Mylohyoid
Medial pterygoid
Lateral pterygoid
Temporalis
Anterior belly of
digastric muscle
Sternothyroid
Superior belly of
omohyoid muscle
Thyrohyoid
Posterior belly of
digastric muscle
Masseter
Fig. 10.20 Muscles of mastication producing movements of 
the temporomandibular joint. The arrows indicate the 
direction of their actions. Chief muscles of mastication are 
labelled in bold.
Fig. 10.21 Origin and insertion of the temporalis muscle.
Superior
temporal line
TEMPORALIS
Last molar tooth
Muscle tendon
Cornoid process of
ramus of mandible
--- Page 165 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
1. Superficial layer.
2. Middle layer.
3. Deep layer.
Superficial layer is largest of the three layers of masseter and 
arises by a thick aponeurosis from: maxillary process of 
zygomatic bone and anterior two-third of the inferior border 
of the zygomatic arch.
Middle layer arises from lower border of the posterior 
one-third of the zygomatic arch.
Deep layer arises from deep surface of the zygomatic arch.
Insertion
1. Superficial fibres pass downwards and backwards at 45°
to be inserted into the angle and lower posterior half of 
the lateral surface of the ramus of the mandible.
2. Middle fibres pass vertically downwards to insert into 
the central part of the ramus.
3. Deep fibres pass vertically downwards to insert into the 
upper part of the mandibular ramus and its coronoid 
process.
N.B.
• Intramuscular tendinous septa in the superficial layer are 
responsible for producing ridges on the ramus of the 
mandible.
• Middle and deep fibres together constitute the deep part 
of the masseter.
Nerve supply
The masseter is supplied by a masseteric nerve, a branch 
from anterior division of the mandibular nerve.
Actions
The masseter muscle elevates the mandible to close the 
mouth.
Lateral Pterygoid
It is described on page 134.
Medial Pterygoid
It is described on page 135.
Accessory Muscles of Mastication
They are described in detail in Chapter 9.
The origin, insertion, nerve supply, and actions of chief 
muscles of mastication are summarized in Table 10.4.
N.B. The chief muscles of mastication are often termed 
muscles of mastication.
The muscles of mastication and their motor innervation can 
be tested clinically by asking the patient to clench his teeth 
repeatedly and then palpating the temporalis and masseter 
in the temporal fossa and over the ramus of mandible, 
respectively.
Clinical correlation
PTERYGOPALATINE FOSSA
The pterygopalatine fossa is a pyramidal space situated 
deeply below the apex of the orbit, between the pterygoid 
process of sphenoid behind and the perpendicular plate of 
palatine in front. More laterally, the back of maxilla replaces 
the palatine bone as the anterior boundary of the entrance of 
the fossa—the pterygomaxillary fissure.
BOUNDARIES (Fig. 10.23)
Anterior: Perpendicular plate of the palatine and posterior 
surface of the maxilla (superomedial part).
Posterior: Pterygoid process and adjoining part of the 
anterior surface of the greater wing of the 
sphenoid.
Medial: 
 Upper part of the perpendicular plate of palatine 
orbital and sphenoidal process of the palatine.
Lateral: 
 The fossa opens into the infratemporal fossa 
through pterygomaxillary fissure.
Superior: Under surface of the body of the sphenoid and 
orbital process of the palatine. The lateral part of 
the roof is open and here fossa opens into the 
orbit through inferior orbital fissure.
Inferior: 
 Pyramidal process of the palatine bone in the 
angle between the maxilla and the pterygoid 
process.
Fig. 10.22 Origin and insertion of the masseter muscle.
Origin from zygomatic arch and 
maxillary process of zygomatic bone
MASSETER
Insertion on ramus and
coronoid process of mandible
--- Page 166 ---
Infratemporal Fossa, Temporomandibular Joint, and Pterygopalatine Fossa
3. With the pharynx through palatovaginal 
canal.
Medially: 
 With the nose through sphenopalatine foramen.
Laterally: 
 With 
infratemporal 
fossa 
through 
pterygomaxillary fissure.
Inferiorly: With the oral cavity through greater and lesser 
palatine canals.
CONTENTS
The following are the main contents of the pterygopalatine 
fossa:
1. Maxillary nerve.
2. Pterygopalatine ganglion.
3. Third part of the maxillary artery.
MAXILLARY NERVE (Fig. 10.24)
The maxillary nerve, the second division (V2) of the 
trigeminal nerve is purely sensory.
Course and Relations
It arises from the convex anterior border of the trigeminal 
ganglion, pierces the trigeminal cave of dura to reach the 
lower part of the lateral wall of the cavernous sinus. The 
nerve leaves the middle cranial fossa through foramen 
rotundum to reach the pterygopalatine fossa. It traverses 
Table 10.4 Origin, insertion, nerve supply, and actions of the muscles of the mastication
Muscles
Origin
Insertion
Nerve supply
Actions
Temporalis 
(fan shaped)
• Floor of temporal fossa
• Temporal fascia
• Tip, anterior border, 
and medial surface of 
coronoid process
• Anterior border of 
ramus of mandible
Mandibular division of 
trigeminal nerve
• Elevation of mandible 
by anterior and middle 
fibres
• Retraction of mandible 
by posterior fibres
Masseter 
(quadrilateral)
Zygomatic arch adjoining 
part of zygomatic process of 
maxilla
• Lateral surface of 
ramus of mandible
• Coronoid process
Mandibular division of 
trigeminal nerve
Elevation of mandible to 
occlude the teeth for 
forceful bite
Lateral pterygoid 
(Short, thick conical)
• Upper head from 
infratemporal surface and 
crest of greater wing of 
sphenoid
• Lower head from lateral 
surface of lateral pterygoid 
plate
• Pterygoid fovea on 
anterior surface of 
neck of mandible
• Articular disc and 
capsule of TMJ
Mandibular division of 
trigeminal nerve
• Depression of 
mandible by pulling 
the neck of mandible 
forward 
• Protraction
Medial pterygoid 
(quadrilateral)
• Superficial head from 
tuberosity of maxilla
• Deep head from medial 
surface of lateral pterygoid 
plate
Medial surface of angle 
adjoining ramus of 
mandible
Mandibular division of 
trigeminal nerve
• Elevation of mandible
• Protraction
Fig. 10.23 Boundaries of the pterygopalatine fossa.
Sphenopalatine foramen
Body of sphenoid
Inferior orbital
fissure
PTERYGO-
PALATINE
FOSSA
Maxilla
Greater palatine
canal
Lesser palatine
canals
Pyramidal process of palatine
Pterygoid
process
Palatovaginal
canal
Pterygoid canal
Foramen
rotundum
COMMUNICATIONS
Anteriorly: With the orbit through the medial end of the 
inferior orbital fissure.
Posteriorly:
1. With the middle cranial fossa through 
foramen rotundum. 
2. With the foramen lacerum through the 
pterygoid canal.
--- Page 167 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
straight in the upper part of the fossa and enters the orbit 
through inferior orbital fissure, hence it is called infraorbital 
nerve. The infraorbital nerve (in fact a continuation of 
maxillary nerve) runs forward along the floor of the orbit in 
the infraorbital groove and canal in succession and appears 
on the face, through infraorbital foramen. Therefore in its 
course the maxillary nerve traverses four regions in 
succession: the middle cranial fossa, the pterygopalatine 
fossa, the orbit and the face.
N.B. In the pterygopalatine fossa the pterygopalatine 
ganglion is suspended from the maxillary nerve by two roots.
Branches and Distribution
The maxillary nerve gives off the following branches:
A. In the Middle Cranial Fossa
1. Meningeal branch, which supplies the dura mater of the 
middle cranial fossa.
B. In the Pterygo-palatine Fossa
1. Ganglionic (communicating) branches, two in number 
to pterygopalatine ganglion.
2. Zygomatic nerve enters the orbit through inferior 
orbital fissure and divides on the lateral wall of the orbit 
into:
(a) a zygomaticotemporal branch, which passes through 
a foramen in the zygomatic bone to supply the skin 
of the temple, and
(b) a zygomaticofacial branch, which passes through 
the foramen in the zygomatic bone to supply the 
skin of the face.
3. Posterior superior alveolar nerve enters the one or two 
foramina on the posterior surface of the body of maxilla 
and supplies the mucus membrane of the maxillary air 
sinus. Then it breaks up to form superior dental plexus, 
which supplies the molar teeth and adjoining part of the 
gum.
C. In the Orbit (infraorbital canal)
1. Middle superior alveolar nerve passes downward and 
forward along the lateral wall of the maxillary sinus, 
joins superior dental plexus and supplies the premolar 
teeth.
2. Anterior superior alveolar nerve runs in the anterior 
wall of the maxillary sinus through a bony canal called 
canalis sinuosus and divides into dental and nasal 
branches:
(a) The dental branches join the superior dental plexus 
and supply the canine and incisor teeth.
(b) The nasal branches appear in the lateral wall of the 
inferior meatus and supply the mucus membrane of 
the lateral wall and floor of the nasal cavity.
D. On the Face
1. Palpebral branches turn upwards and supply the skin of 
the lower eyelid.
2. Nasal branches supply the skin of the side of nose and 
the mobile part of the nasal septum.
3. Superior labial branches supply the skin and mucus 
membrane of the upper lip.
N.B. The superior dental plexus is formed by posterior, 
middle, and anterior superior alveolar nerves. It is situated in 
the alveolar process of the maxilla above the sockets of the 
teeth.
The branches of maxillary nerve are summarized in the 
Table 10.5.
Fig. 10.24 Origin, course, and branches of the maxillary nerve.
Meningeal
branch
Zygomatic
nerve
Foramen
rotundum
Inferior orbital
fissure
Infraorbital
nerve
Infraorbital
foramen
Palpebral branch
Superior dental plexus
Nasal branch
Superior labial branch
Anterior superior
alveolar nerve
Middle superior
alveolar nerve
Posterior superior
alveolar nerve
Pterygopalatine
ganglion
Ganglionic
branches
Trigeminal
ganglion
Maxillary
sinus
--- Page 168 ---
Infratemporal Fossa, Temporomandibular Joint, and Pterygopalatine Fossa
Table 10.5 Summary of branches of the maxillary nerve
Region
Branches
In the middle cranial fossa
Meningeal branch
In the pterygopalatine 
fossa
• Ganglionic branches
• Posterior superior alveolar 
nerves 
• Zygomatic nerve
In the infraorbital canal
• Middle superior alveolar nerve
• Anterior superior alveolar nerve
On the face
• Palpebral branch
• Nasal branch 
• Labial branch
PTERYGOPALATINE GANGLION
The pterygopalatine ganglion (ganglion of hay fever) is the 
largest parasympathetic peripheral ganglion. It serves as a relay 
station for the secretomotor fibres to the lacrimal gland and 
mucus glands of the nose, palate, pharynx, and paranasal 
sinuses. Topographically, it is related to the maxillary nerve, 
but functionally it is connected to the facial nerve through 
greater petrosal nerve (Fig. 10.25).
Location
It is located deeply in the upper part of the pterygopalatine 
fossa, suspended from maxillary nerve by two short roots.
Size
Head of a small pin.
Relations
Behind: Pterygoid canal.
Medial: Sphenopalatine foramen.
In front: Perpendicular plate of palatine.
Above: 
Maxillary nerve.
Roots
The roots of pterygopalatine ganglion are as follows:
1. Motor or parasympathetic root: It is derived from the 
nerve of pterygoid canal. It carries preganglionic 
parasympathetic fibres from superior salivatory nucleus 
(located in the lower part of the pons). These fibres relay 
in the ganglion. The postganglionic fibres arise from the 
cells in the ganglion and supply secretomotor fibres to 
the lacrimal gland, glands of the nose, palate, 
nasopharynx, and paranasal sinuses.
2. Sympathetic root: It is derived from sympathetic plexus 
around internal carotid artery via nerve of pterygoid 
canal. It contains postganglionic fibres from superior 
cervical sympathetic ganglion. These fibres pass through 
the ganglion without relay and provide vasomotor 
supply to the mucus membrane of the nose, palate, 
pharynx, and paranasal air sinuses.
Fig. 10.25 Pterygopalatine ganglion, its roots and branches.
Greater
palatine nerve
Palate
Lesser palatine
nerves
Pharyngeal
branch
Nerve of pterygoid canal
(Vidian’s nerve)
Maxillary nerve
Nasal
branches
Orbital branches
Lacrimal
gland
Deep petrosal
nerve
Greater superficial
petrosal (GSPN) nerve
Sympathetic plexus
around internal
carotid artery
Superior cervical
sympathetic ganglion
Facial nerve
Superior salivatory
nucleus
Pterygopalatine ganglion
--- Page 169 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
3. Sensory root: It is derived from maxillary nerve and 
passes through the ganglion without interruption to be 
distributed through the branches of the ganglion.
Branches of Distribution
The branches of the ganglion are actually the branches of 
maxillary nerve, which passes through the ganglion without 
relaying. While passing through the ganglion, they 
incorporate the parasympathetic and sympathetic fibres of 
the ganglion.
The ganglion provides the following four sets of branches:
1. Orbital.
2. Palatine.
3. Nasal.
4. Pharyngeal.
The orbital branches (2 or 3 in number) enter the orbit 
through inferior orbital fissure and supply orbital 
periosteum, ethmoidal air sinuses, and secretomotor fibres 
to the lacrimal gland.
The palatine branches include greater and lesser palatine 
nerves. The greater palatine nerve passes through greater 
palatine canal and foramen to supply posteroinferior 
quadrant of the lateral wall of the nose. The lesser palatine 
nerves pass through lesser palatine canals and foramina to 
supply secretomotor fibres to mucus membrane and glands 
on the inferior surface of soft palate and hard palate.
The nasal branches pass through sphenopalatine foramen 
to enter the nasal cavity. These are called posterior superior 
nasal nerves. These are divided into two sets lateral and 
medial. The nerves of lateral set supply lateral wall of the 
nasal cavity while those of medial set supply roof and nasal 
septum.
The longest branch of medial set is called nasopalatine/
sphenopalatine nerve. It runs anteroinferiorly in a groove 
on the nasal septum and leaves the nasal cavity through the 
incisive foramen to enter the oral cavity where it supplies 
the anterior part of hard palate.
The pharyngeal branch passes through palatovaginal 
canal and supply the nasopharynx.
The allergic conditions, viz. hay-fever or cold, cause irritation 
of nerve of pterygoid canal/pterygopalatine ganglion, which 
causes congestion of glands of the nose and palate, and 
lacrimal gland. Consequently the individual suffers from 
running nose and eyes, for this reason the nerve of pterygoid 
canal is called nerve of hay fever and the pterygopalatine 
ganglion is termed ganglion of hay fever.
Clinical correlation
THIRD PART OF THE MAXILLARY ARTERY
The third part of the maxillary artery enters the pterygo-
palatine fossa by passing first between the upper and lower 
heads of lateral pterygoid and then through the 
pterygomaxillary fissure. Within the fossa it lies in front of 
the pterygopalatine ganglion and divides into its terminal 
branches. The branches of the third part of the maxillary 
artery and its distribution are described in detail on page 
138 of this chapter.
--- Page 170 ---
Infratemporal Fossa, Temporomandibular Joint, and Pterygopalatine Fossa
Golden Facts to Remember
  Key muscle of the infratemporal fossa
Lateral pterygoid muscle
  All the principal muscles of mastication close 
the mouth except
Lateral pterygoid, which opens the mouth
  Clinically the most important branch of 
maxillary artery is
Middle meningeal artery
  Peripheral heart in the region of head and neck
Lateral pterygoid muscle
  Chief elevator of the lower jaw
Masseter
  All the branches of anterior division of 
mandibular nerve are motor except
Buccal nerve, which is sensory and supplies mucus 
membrane and skin of the cheek
  All the branches of posterior division of 
mandibular nerve are sensory except
Mylohyoid nerve, which is motor and supplies mylohyoid 
muscle and anterior belly of digastric muscle
  Most common nerve block given in dentistry
Inferior alveolar nerve block
  Most common dislocation of 
temporomandibular joint
Anterior dislocation
  Ganglion of hay fever
Pterygopalatine ganglion
  Most common cause of dislocation of 
temporomandibular joint
Blow to the chin when mouth is widely open (as in 
laughing or yawning)
A medical student was yawning in the anatomy lecture. 
The young lecturer walked to the student and hit him 
on the chin when he yawned widely again. Following a 
blow on chin the student got up immediately and 
wanted to say sorry to the teacher, but he could not say 
so because he failed to close his jaws. He kept standing 
with mouth open widely as his jaw got stuck. 
The lecturer immediately realized that student’s 
temporomandibular joints are dislocated. He took him 
to the orofacial surgeon who reduced the dislocation 
and the student was relieved of his agony.
Questions
1. Mention the type of temporomandibular joint 
and name the bones taking part in its formation.
2. What are the unique features of TMJ?
3. Name the parts of intra-articular disc?
4. Name the commonest variety of TMJ dislocation 
and how is it reduced?
Answers
1. It is a condylar type of synovial joint. The bones 
taking part are head (condyle) of the mandible and 
mandibular fossa and articular eminence of 
squamous part of the temporal bone.
2. (a) Articular surfaces are covered by plates of 
articular fibrocartilages.
(b) Joint cavity is divided into two compartments 
by an intra-articular disc.
(c) Joints 
sides 
function 
together 
concomitantly to accomplish the movements 
of the lower jaw.
3. From anterior to posterior the parts of the 
intraarticular disc are: (a) anterior extension, 
(b) anterior thick band, (c) thin intermediate zone, 
(d) posterior thick band, and (e) bilaminar 
posterior extension.
4. Anterior dislocation. It is reduced as follows: The 
mandible is depressed posteriorly by exerting 
pressure on last molar teeth with thumbs and 
simultaneously the assistant elevates the chin (also 
refer to page 148).
Clinical Case Study
--- Page 171 ---
Thyroid and Parathyroid 
Glands, Trachea, and 
Esophagus
CHAPTER
The thyroid and parathyroid glands and cervical parts of the 
trachea and esophagus are closely related structures.
In the region of neck, thyroid and trachea are routinely 
examined by clinicians to diagnose their disorders, e.g., 
goitre, tracheal tug, etc. The surgical procedures are commonly 
performed on these structures, e.g., thyroidectomy, 
tracheostomy, etc. Therefore, detailed knowledge of anatomy 
and relations of these structures is extremely important.
THYROID GLAND (G. THYREOS = SHIELD; 
EDIDOS = FORM)
The thyroid gland is the largest endocrine gland of the body. 
The hormones secreted by the thyroid gland include triiodo-
thyronine (T3), tetraiodothyronine (T4; commonly called 
thyroxine), and calcitonin, which subserve the following 
functions:
1. Regulate the basal metabolic rate.
2. Stimulate the psychosomatic growth of the body.
3. Play an important role in calcium metabolism.
Special Features
The special features of the thyroid gland are:
1. It is the only endocrine gland, which is located 
superficially in the body, hence accessible for physical 
examination.
2. It is the only endocrine gland that depends on external 
environment for raw material, iodine, to synthesize its 
hormones.
3. It is the only endocrine gland, which does not pour its 
hormones into blood immediately after formation but 
stores them and then releases them in blood for use as 
and when required.
4. It is one of the organ of the body having a very rich 
blood flow.
LOCATION 
The thyroid gland is located in the lower part of the front 
and side of the neck opposite to the C5, C6, C7, and T1 
vertebrae (Figs 11.1 and 11.2), clasping the upper part of the 
trachea.
Parts and Features
 It is H-shaped and consisting of vertical right and left 
lateral lobes and a horizontal isthmus connecting them 
across the midline. Sometimes a small pyramidal lobe
projects upwards from the isthmus usually to the left of 
the midline. Not infrequently, it is connected to the body 
Thyroid gland
Sternocleidomastoid
Trachea
Fig. 11.1 Location of the thyroid gland.
--- Page 172 ---
Thyroid and Parathyroid Glands, Trachea, and Esophagus
of the hyoid bone by a fibrous or fibromuscular band 
called levator glandulae thyroideae.
 Each lateral lobe of the gland extends upwards to the 
oblique line of the thyroid cartilage and below up to the 
5th or 6th tracheal ring.
 The isthmus extends across the midline in front of the 
2nd, 3rd, and 4th tracheal rings.
Weight and Dimensions
The thyroid gland weighs about 25 g. Each lobe of the 
thyroid gland is 5 cm long, 3 cm wide, and 2 cm thick 
(5 × 3 × 2 cm). The isthmus measures about 1.25 cm in both, 
vertical and transverse diameters.
N.B. The thyroid gland is usually larger in females and 
further increases in size during menstruation and pregnancy.
Capsule of the Thyroid Gland (Fig. 11.3)
The thyroid gland is invested by two capsules: an inner true 
capsule and an outer false capsule.
1. True capsule: It is formed by the peripheral condensation 
of the fibrous stroma of the gland.
2. False capsule: It is derived from the splitting of the 
pretracheal fascia. The important features of the false 
capsule are:
(a) It is thin along the posterior border of the lateral lobe.
(b) It is thick on the medial surface of the lateral lobe.
(c) Traced above, the pretracheal fascia after enclosing 
the thyroid gland is attached to the oblique lines of 
the thyroid cartilage, and the body of the hyoid bone 
in the midline. On the medial surface of thyroid lobe 
it thickens to form the suspensory ligament of 
Berry, which connects the lobe to the cricoid 
cartilage.
The dense venous plexus unlike that of the prostate gland lies 
deep to true capsule (Fig. 11.3). Therefore, to avoid hemorrhage 
during thyroidectomy, the thyroid gland is removed along 
with the true capsule.
N.B. In case of prostate gland, the venous plexus lies 
between its true and false capsules and, therefore, during 
surgical removal of prostate gland (prostatectomy), prostate 
gland is removed; leaving behind both the capsules.
• Sometimes the thyroid tumor extends backwards, as the 
capsule is thin along the posterior borders of the lateral 
lobes, compressing the adjacent structures without 
forming a visible swelling on the front of the neck.
• The thyroid gland moves up and down during 
swallowing because its capsule is attached to laryngeal 
cartilages and hyoid bone, which moves up and down 
during swallowing. Thus thyroid swellings can be 
distinguished clinically from other swellings in the region of 
the neck.
Clinical correlation
RELATIONS
Relations of the Thyroid Lobe (Fig. 11.4, 11.5, and 11.6)
Each lobe of the thyroid gland is roughly pyramidal 
(conical) and presents apex, base, three surfaces (lateral, 
medial, and posterolateral), and two borders (anterior and 
posterior):
 Apex: The apex is directed upwards and slightly laterally. 
It extends up to the oblique line of thyroid cartilage where 
Fig. 11.2 Parts and extent of the thyroid gland.
Hyoid bone
Thyroid cartilage
Levator glandulae
thyroideae
Cricoid cartilage
Pyramidal lobe
First tracheal ring
Lateral lobe of
thyroid gland
Isthmus of
thyroid gland
Fifth tracheal ring
Vertebral levels
Fig. 11.3 Capsules of the thyroid gland.
Thyroid veins
True capsule
Venous plexus
False capsule
Plane of cleavage
Thyroid gland
--- Page 173 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
Fig. 11.4 Relations of the lateral lobe of the thyroid gland: A, upward extension of the thyroid lobe and muscles attached 
to the oblique line of the thyroid cartilage; B, the apex is sandwiched between the inferior constrictor and sternothyroid.
Muscles attached on
the oblique line of
thyroid cartilage
1. Thyrohyoid
2. Sternothyroid
3. Inferior
 
constrictor
Outline of the
lateral lobe
Thyroid cartilage
Thyrohyoid
muscle
Superior thyroid
artery
External laryngeal
nerve
Inferior constrictor
Lateral lobe of
thyroid gland
Sternothyroid
Cricoid cartilage
Tracheal ring
Fig. 11.5 Transverse section of the anterior part of the neck at the level of thyroid isthmus, showing relations of the thyroid 
gland.
Isthmus of thyroid gland
Sternothyroid
Sternohyoid
Omohyoid (sup. belly)
Sternocleidomastoid
Internal jugular
vein
Common carotid
artery
Recurrent
laryngeal
nerve
Vagus nerve
Trachea
Esophagus
Sympathetic
trunk
Prevertebral
fascia
Carotid sheath
Parathyroid
gland
Pretracheal
fascia
Investing layer of
deep cervical fascia
it is limited above by the attachment of sternothyroid 
muscle. The apex is sandwiched between the inferior 
constrictor 
medially 
sternothyroid 
laterally 
(Fig. 11.4).
 Base: The base extends up to the 5th or 6th tracheal 
ring. It is related to inferior thyroid artery and recurrent 
laryngeal nerve.
 Lateral (superficial) surfaces: It is convex and is covered 
by (Fig. 11.5):
(a) three strap muscles (sternothyroid, sternohyoid, and 
superior belly of omohyoid), and
(b) anterior border of sternocleidomastoid overlapping 
it inferiorly.
 Medial surface is related to (Fig. 11.6):
(a) two tubes: trachea and esophagus,
(b) two muscles: inferior constrictor and cricothyroid, and
(c) two cartilages: cricoid and thyroid.
--- Page 174 ---
Thyroid and Parathyroid Glands, Trachea, and Esophagus
 Posterolateral surface is related to (Fig. 11.5) carotid 
sheath and its contents (common carotid artery, internal 
jugular vein, and vagus nerve). The ansa-cervicalis is 
embedded in the anterior wall of the sheath while cervical 
sympathetic chain lies posterior to sheath in front of 
prevertebral fascia.
 Anterior border is thin and separates superficial and 
medial surfaces. It is related to anterior branch of the 
superior thyroid artery.
 Posterior border is thick and rounded. It separates the 
medial and the posterior surfaces. It is related to
(a) longitudinal arterial anastomosis between superior 
and inferior thyroid arteries, and
(b) parathyroid glands.
Relations of Isthmus
The isthmus is horizontal and presents two surfaces—
anterior and posterior and two borders—superior and 
inferior.
 Anterior surface is related to:
(a) strap muscles (sternohyoid and sternothyroid) and
(b) anterior jugular veins.
 Posterior surface is related to 2nd, 3rd, and 4th tracheal 
rings.
 Superior border is related to anastomosis between the 
anterior branches of two superior thyroid arteries.
 Inferior border. Along this border inferior thyroid vein 
emerge and thyroidea ima artery (when present) enters.
ARTERIAL SUPPLY
The gland is highly vascular and is supplied by the following 
arteries (Fig. 11.7):
1. Superior thyroid artery: It is a branch of the external 
carotid artery. It runs downwards and forwards in 
company with the external laryngeal nerve, which it 
leaves near the upper pole of the thyroid lobe. At the 
apex of the lobe, it divides into anterior and posterior 
branches. The anterior branch first descends along the 
anterior border of the lobe and then continues along the 
upper border of the isthmus to anastomose with its 
fellows of opposite side. The posterior branch descends 
along the posterior border of the lobe to anastomose 
with the ascending branch of the inferior thyroid artery.
Superior thyroid artery supplies the upper one-third 
of the lobe and upper half of the isthmus.
2. Inferior thyroid artery: It is a branch of thyrocervical 
trunk from the first part of the subclavian artery. It first 
runs upwards along the medial border of scalenus 
anterior, and then passes medially behind the carotid 
sheath to reach the back of the thyroid lobe, where it is 
intimately related to the recurrent laryngeal nerve. The 
recurrent laryngeal nerve presents a variable relationship 
with the artery. It may pass behind or in front of the loop 
of the artery or between the branches of the artery 
(Fig. 11.8). The artery gives 4 or 5 branches. One 
Superior laryngeal nerve
Vagus nerve
Two muscles
cartilages
Superior thyroid artery
Internal laryngeal
nerve
External laryngeal nerve
Thyroid cartilage
Cricoid cartilage
Trachea
Esophagus
Inferior thyroid artery
Recurrent laryngeal nerve
tubes
Cricothyroid
Inferior
constrictor
Fig. 11.6 Medial relations of the lateral lobe of the thyroid 
gland. The figure also shows intimate relationship of the 
external and recurrent laryngeal nerves with the superior 
and inferior thyroid arteries, respectively.
Fig. 11.7 Arterial supply of the thyroid gland.
Thyroidea
ima artery
Superior
thyroid artery
Posterior
branch
Anterior
branch
External
carotid
artery
Inferior
thyroid
artery
Thyrocervical
trunk
Subclavian
artery
Recurrent
laryngeal nerve
External
laryngeal
nerve
Superior
laryngeal nerve
Arch of aorta
--- Page 175 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
ascending branch anastomoses with the posterior 
branch of the superior thyroid artery.
The inferior thyroid artery supplies lower two-third 
of the lobe and lower half of the isthmus.
3. Thyroidea ima artery (in 30% cases): It is a branch of 
the brachiocephalic trunk or may arise directly from the 
arch of aorta. It enters the isthmus from below.
4. Accessory thyroid arteries: They arise from tracheal and 
esophageal arteries.
VENOUS DRAINAGE
The venous blood from the thyroid gland is drained by three 
set of veins (Fig. 11.9), viz.
1. Superior thyroid vein: It emerges at the upper pole of 
the thyroid lobe, runs upwards and laterally, and drains 
into the internal jugular vein.
2. Middle thyroid vein: This short, wide venous channel 
emerges at the middle of the lobe to soon enter the internal 
jugular vein.
3. Inferior thyroid vein/veins: They emerge at the lower 
border of the isthmus, form plexus in front of the trachea 
and then run downwards to drain into the left 
brachiocephalic vein.
4. Sometimes a fourth vein, the thyroid vein (of Kocher)
emerges between the middle and inferior thyroid veins 
to drain into the internal jugular vein.
LYMPHATIC DRAINAGE (Fig. 11.10)
The lymph vessels draining the thyroid gland are arranged into 
two groups, upper and lower, and they follow the arteries:
1. The upper group drains into the prelaryngeal (lying in 
front of the larynx) and upper deep cervical (jugulo-
digastric) lymph nodes.
2. The lower group drains into pretracheal and lower deep 
cervical lymph nodes and group of lymph nodes along 
the recurrent laryngeal nerves. Those from lower part of 
isthmus drain into retrosternal or brachiocephalic nodes 
lying in the superior mediastinum.
The upper lymphatics follow superior thyroid artery and 
lower lymphatics follow the inferior thyroid arteries.
NERVE SUPPLY
The thyroid gland is supplied by both sympathetic and 
parasympathetic nerve fibres:
1. The parasympathetic supply is derived from the vagus 
and recurrent laryngeal nerves.
2. The sympathetic supply is derived from the superior, 
middle, and inferior cervical sympathetic ganglia, but 
mainly from the middle one.
Fig. 11.8 Variable relationship of recurrent laryngeal nerve with the inferior thyroid artery.
Cricothyroid
joint
Inferior thyroid
artery
Recurrent
laryngeal nerve
Inferior
thyroid
artery
Recurrent
laryngeal
nerve
Inferior
thyroid
artery
Recurrent
laryngeal
nerve
Fig. 11.9 Venous drainage of the thyroid gland.
Superior
thyroid
vein
Internal
jugular
vein
Left brachiocephalic
vein
Kocher’s
vein
Right
brachiocephalic
vein
Middle
thyroid
vein
Inferior
thyroid
vein/veins
--- Page 176 ---
Thyroid and Parathyroid Glands, Trachea, and Esophagus
The parafollicular cells or C-cells lie mainly between the 
basement membrane and the follicular cells. Some of them 
also lie in the spaces between the follicles. They secrete a 
hormone called thyrocalcitonin (also called calcitonin). It 
plays an important role in calcium metabolism. It reduces the 
blood calcium level by reducing the reabsorption of the 
calcium by the renal tubules. Its effects are opposite to that of 
parathormone.
• Goitre: Any enlargement of the thyroid gland except that 
during menstruation and lactation is called goitre. It may 
be associated with hypofunction or hyperfunction of the 
gland.
 Hypothyroidism occurs when there is insufficient secretion 
of the T3 and T4. The decreased levels of T3 and T4 cause 
increased secretion of TSH.
Hypothyroidism causes cretinism in children and 
myxedema in adults (for details see General Anatomy by 
Vishram Singh).
Hyperthyroidism (or thyrotoxicosis) occurs due to excess 
secretion of T3 and T4. The thyrotoxicosis clinically 
presents as: tachycardia, tremors, and systolic bruit. The 
main effects are due to increased BMR.
• Simple goitre/puberty goitre: It is an enlargement of the 
thyroid gland without signs of hyperthyroidism. It occurs 
due to deficiency of iodine in diet. Remember iodine is 
essential for synthesis of thyroid hormone. The decreased 
levels of T3 and T4 lead to increased secretion of TSH 
from the pituitary gland. The TSH causes hyperplasia of 
the thyroid gland. Simple goitre commonly occurs in 
females at the age of puberty, hence it is also called 
puberty goitre.
• Effects of massive enlargement of thyroid gland 
(goitre; Fig. 11.12): The thyroid gland can enlarge 
backwards or downwards but it cannot enlarge upwards 
due to attachment of its fascial sheath and sternothyroid 
muscle to the thyroid cartilage.
The backward enlargement is common because the 
thyroid capsule is relatively thin posteriorly. In backward 
enlargement, the gland buries itself around the sides of 
trachea and esophagus.
This results in three characteristic pressure symptoms, 
viz.
– Dyspnea (difficulty in breathing), due to pressure on 
trachea.
– Dysphagia (difficulty in swallowing), due to pressure on 
esophagus.
– Dysphonia (hoarseness of voice), due to pressure on 
the recurrent laryngeal nerve, which lies in the 
tracheoesophageal groove.
Mnemonic = 3D
The downward expansion behind the sternum is called 
retrosternal goitre. It can compress trachea leading to 
dangerous dyspnea.
It can also cause severe venous compression leading to 
venous congestion (Fig. 19.10).
Clinical correlation
Fig. 11.10 Lymphatic drainage of the thyroid gland.
Prelaryngeal nodes
Jugulodigastric
nodes
Posterior belly of
digastric muscle
Retrosternal/
brachiocephalic
nodes
Nodes along the
recurrent laryngeal
nerve
Jugulo-omohyoid
nodes
Recurrent
laryngeal nerve
Inferior belly of
omohyoid muscle
Pretracheal nodes
Follicular cells
Blood
capillaries
Parafollicular
or C-cells
Thyroid follicles
Parafollicular
cell
Fig. 11.11 Microscopic structure of the thyroid gland.
MICROSCOPIC STRUCTURE (Fig. 11.11)
The thyroid gland consists of two types of secretory cells: 
follicular and parafollicular.
The follicular cells are cuboidal epithelial cells forming 
the wall of spherical thyroid follicles. They secrete two 
hormones: thyroxine and triiodothyronine.
These hormones are essential for normal growth and 
development, specially of the skeletal and nervous system.
--- Page 177 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
• Ligation of thyroid arteries during thyroidectomy: The 
superior thyroid artery and the external laryngeal nerve 
diverge from each other near the apex, the artery lies 
superficial and the nerve lies deep to the apex. Therefore, 
during thyroidectomy, the superior thyroid artery should 
be ligated as close to the apex of thyroid lobe as possible 
to avoid injury to the external laryngeal nerve.
The recurrent laryngeal nerve lies very close to the 
inferior thyroid artery near the base of the thyroid lobe. 
Therefore, during thyroidectomy, the inferior thyroid artery 
should be ligated as away from the base of the thyroid lobe 
as possible to avoid injury to the recurrent laryngeal nerve.
• Benign tumors may compress or also displace the 
neighboring structures whereas malignant growth tends 
to invade surrounding structures.
DEVELOPMENT (Fig. 11.13)
The thyroid gland begins to develop as endodermal 
thickening in the midline of the floor of the pharynx 
immediately behind the tuberculum impar during 3rd 
week of intrauterine life. This thickening is soon depressed 
below the surface to form a diverticulum called thyroglossal 
duct. This duct grows downwards across the tongue, then 
descends in front of the neck. In the neck, it passes in front 
of hyoid bone, binds around its lower border to become 
retrohyoid and finally descends below the hyoid with slight 
inclination to one side, usually to left to reach its definitive 
position (by the end of the 7th week) where its tip bifurcates 
and proliferates to form the bilateral terminal swellings, 
which expand to form the thyroid gland. A portion of the 
duct near its tip sometimes forms the pyramidal lobe. The 
remaining duct disappears. The site of origin of thyroglossal 
duct is, however, marked by foramen caecum at the 
junction of the anterior two-third and posterior one-third 
of the tongue in adults (Fig. 11.13). The thyroid is the 
earliest glandular tissue to develop and becomes functional 
during the 3rd month.
N.B. The ultimobranchial bodies from 5th pharyngeal 
pouches and neural crest cells become incorporated 
secondarily into thyroid gland and form parafollicular cells 
or C-cells.
Congenital anomalies: The development of the thyroid 
gland may account for the following common congenital 
anomalies:
– Thyroglossal cyst/fi stula: Thyroglossal duct may persist 
and lead to formation of thyroglossal cyst and fi stula.
– Ectopic thyroid: The Thyroid gland (thyroid tissue) may be 
found at an abnormal position anywhere along the course 
of thyroglossal duct
 (a) at the base of the tongue (lingual thyroid). In lingual 
thyroid, the mass of thyroid tissue is located within the 
tongue just beneath the foramen caecum, and if large, 
it may cause difficulty in swallowing by the infant.
 (b) above, behind or below the hyoid bone (suprahyoid, 
retrohyoid, or infrahyoid thyroid).
– One of the lobes may be absent.
– Isthmus may be absent.
– Descent of the thyroglossal duct may go beyond the 
definitive position in the neck to superior mediastinum 
(retrosternal thyroid).
– Thyroid tissue may be situated away from the normal 
course of the thyroglossal duct, viz. in relation to carotid 
sheath, in the mediastinum, in the pericardium (aberrant 
thyroid).
Clinical correlation
PARATHYROID GLANDS
These are two pairs (superior and inferior) of small endocrine 
glands located along the posterior borders of the thyroid 
lobes within the thyroid capsule (Fig. 11.14). They appear as 
small yellowish-brown bodies.
The parathyroid glands secrete parathormone (a 
hormone), which maintains blood calcium level by 
mobilizing the calcium from the bones. Its action is opposite 
to that of calcitonin secreted by the thyroid.
Location
The superior parathyroid lies at the middle of the posterior 
border of the thyroid lobe above the level at which inferior 
thyroid artery crosses the recurrent laryngeal nerve. They 
develop from the fourth pharyngeal pouch and hence also 
termed as parathyroid-IV.
The inferior parathyroid lies on the posterior border of 
the thyroid lobe near its lower pole, below the inferior thyroid 
artery. They develop from the third pharyngeal pouch, hence 
also termed as parathyroid-III.
Fig. 11.12 Massive enlargement of the thyroid gland. 
(Source: Page 267, Short Cases in Clinical Medicine, 5e, 
ABM Abdullah, Copyright Elsevier 2013, All rights reserved.)
--- Page 178 ---
Thyroid and Parathyroid Glands, Trachea, and Esophagus
N.B.
• The superior parathyroid is fairly constant in position and 
usually lies at the middle of the posterior border of the 
thyroid gland.
• The inferior parathyroid is more variable in position. It may 
lie: (a) within the thyroid capsule, below the loop of the 
inferior thyroid artery, (b) outside the capsule, above the 
loop of the thyroid artery, or (c) within the substance of the 
thyroid gland.
Size and Shape
They are small, oval or lentiform in shape. Each gland 
measures about 6 mm in length, 4 mm in breadth and 2 mm 
in thickness, the size of a split pea and weighs about 50 mg.
BLOOD SUPPLY
The parathyroid glands have rich blood supply.
The superior parathyroid is supplied by the superior 
parathyroid artery, a branch from anastomotic artery joining 
the superior and the inferior thyroid arteries, or from inferior 
thyroid artery.
The inferior parathyroid is supplied by the inferior 
parathyroid artery, a branch of inferior thyroid artery. The 
inferior parathyroid artery is a good guide to locate the 
parathyroid gland especially if it lies below the thyroid gland.
NERVE SUPPLY
The parathyroid glands are supplied by the sympathetic 
fibres, derived from the superior and middle cervical 
sympathetic ganglia or sympathetic plexus around the inferior 
thyroid artery. These fibres are vasomotor in nature.
Fig. 11.13 Development of the thyroid gland: A, different stages in the development; B, shows the path taken by thyroglossal 
duct as it migrates inferiorly.
(II)
(III)
(IV)
Foramen
caecum
Thyroglossal
duct
Bifid lower end of
thyroglossal duct
Endodermal
thickening
Remains of
thyroglossal duct
Pyramidal lobe
Lateral lobe
Isthmus
Thyroid developing
from thyroglossal duct
Thyroglossal
duct
Ultimobranchial
body
Lingual
thyroid
Tuberculum impar
Thyroglossal
cyst or ectopic
thyroid
Hyoid bone
Copula
Foramen caecum
Thyroid
gland
Thyroid
cartilage
Fig. 11.14 Location of the parathyroid glands: A, posterior 
aspect of the thyroid gland; B, section through thyroid lobe 
along with its capsule.
Superior thyroid artery
Superior
parathyroid
Inferior
parathyroid
Anastomosis
between superior and
inferior thyroid arteries
Pretracheal fascia
Inferior thyroid
artery
Suspensory
ligament of Berry
Ascending branch of
inferior thyroid artery
Parathyroid gland
Weak part of the
capsule
--- Page 179 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
Fig. 11.16 Development of the parathyroid gland: sites of 
development and final positions taken by them.
The secretory activity of the gland is controlled by blood 
calcium level; low level of calcium stimulates secretion 
whereas high levels of calcium inhibit the secretion.
MICROSCOPIC STRUCTURE AND FUNCTIONS
The parenchymal cells of the gland form irregular 
anastomosing cords or groups of cells. The parenchymal cells 
are of two types: principal or chief cells and oxyphil cells.
The chief cells form the major population and secrete 
parathyroid hormone called parathormone.
The oxyphil cells form minor population and their function 
is not known.
The parathyroid hormone plays an important role in 
calcium metabolism.
It maintains the blood calcium level by:
1. Enhancing the mobilization of calcium from bones by 
osteoclastic activity.
2. Increasing the reabsorption of calcium by proximal 
renal tubules.
3. Promoting the absorption of dietary calcium from small 
intestine.
• Hypoparathyroidism may occur spontaneously or due to 
inadvertent removal of parathyroid glands during 
thyroidectomy. It results in tetany due to low blood calcium 
level. Clinically the tetany presents as increased 
neuromuscular excitability, causing convulsions and 
carpopedal spasms (Fig. 11.15).
• Hyperparathyroidism is seen in the tumors of the 
parathyroid 
glands. 
increased 
amount 
parathormone: (a) removes excessive calcium from bones, 
which makes the bones soft due to decalcification leading 
to a clinical condition called generalized osteitis fi brosa, 
and (b) may cause formation of stones in the kidney.
Clinical correlation
DEVELOPMENT (Fig. 11.16)
The inferior parathyroid gland develops from the third 
pharyngeal pouch along with thymus. As the thymic 
diverticulum migrates inferiorly in the neck, it pulls inferior 
parathyroid with it. Consequently, the inferior parathyroid 
comes to lie finally on the posterior surface of the thyroid 
lobe near the lower pole.
The superior parathyroid gland develops from the fourth 
pharyngeal pouch and finally lies on the posterior surface of 
the thyroid lobe at the level of the isthmus.
TRACHEA
The trachea is a non-collapsible membrano-cartilaginous 
tube forming the beginning of lower respiratory passage.
EXTENT
Trachea extends from the lower border of cricoid cartilage at 
the lower border of the C6 vertebra to the lower border of T4 
vertebra in supine position, where it terminates by dividing 
into right and left principal bronchi.
DIMENSIONS
The trachea is a 4–6 inch (10–11 cm) long tube. The upper 
half of trachea is located in the neck (cervical part) whereas 
the lower half lies in the superior mediastinum of the thoracic 
cavity (thoracic part).
The external diameter of trachea is 2 cm in males and 
1.5 cm in females.
The lumen is smaller in living human than that in cadav-
ers. It is about 3 mm in newborns and remains so up to the 
third year of life; thereafter the lumen increases by 1 mm each 
year up to 12 years, after which it remains fairly constant.
This knowledge is very important for the anesthetists to 
select the appropriate size of tracheal tube to be inserted into 
the trachea in children during general anesthesia.
STRUCTURE
The trachea is composed of about 16–20 C-shaped rings of 
hyaline cartilage lying one above the other. The cartilages 
are deficient posteriorly where the gap is filled by connective 
tissue and involuntary muscle called trachealis. The absence 
of cartilages on the posterior aspect allows expansion of 
Fig. 11.15 Hand spasm in tetany.
Primitive
pharynx
Thymus
Superior
parathyroid
Inferior
parathyroid
--- Page 180 ---
Thyroid and Parathyroid Glands, Trachea, and Esophagus
esophagus during deglutition. In cross section the trachea 
appears D-shaped or horseshoe-shaped. The following text 
deals with cervical part in detail. For thoracic part see 
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax, Vol. I by 
Vishram Singh.
CERVICAL PART OF TRACHEA
The cervical part of the trachea is about 7 cm in length and 
extends from the lower border of cricoid cartilage to the 
upper border of manubrium sterni. It extends downwards 
and slightly backwards in front of the esophagus following 
curvature of the cervical spine and enters the thoracic 
cavity in the median plane with slight deviation on the 
right side.
Relations of the Cervical Parts of Trachea
In the neck, the trachea is relatively superficial and has 
following relations:
Anteriorly, from superficial to deep it is related to:
(a) skin,
(b) superficial fascia containing anterior jugular veins and 
jugular venous arch (crossing in the suprasternal space 
of Burns),
(c) investing layer of deep cervical fascia,
(d) sternothyroid and sternohyoid muscles,
(e) isthmus of thyroid gland in front of the 2nd, 3rd, and 
4th tracheal rings,
(f) inferior thyroid veins and arteria thyroidea ima 
(occasional),
(g) left brachiocephalic vein in children may rise in the neck,
(h) thymus gland (in children), and
(i) brachiocephalic artery (sometimes) in children.
Posteriorly it is related to:
(a) esophagus, and
(b) recurrent laryngeal nerve in the tracheoesophageal 
groove (on each side).
On each side it is related to:
(a) lobe of thyroid gland extending up to the 5th or 6th 
tracheal ring, and
(b) common carotid artery in the carotid sheath.
BLOOD SUPPLY AND LYMPHATIC DRAINAGE
The arterial supply of the cervical part of trachea is derived 
mainly from branches of the inferior thyroid arteries.
The veins from trachea drain into the left brachiocephalic 
vein.
The lymph from trachea drains into pre- and paratracheal 
nodes.
NERVE SUPPLY
This is by sympathetic and parasympathetic fibres.
The parasympathetic fibres are derived from vagus 
through the recurrent laryngeal nerve. They are secretomotor 
and sensory to the mucus membrane and motor to the 
trachealis muscle.
The sympathetic fibres are derived from the middle cervical 
sympathetic ganglion. They are vasomotor in nature.
Tracheostomy: It is a life-saving surgical procedure done in 
cases of laryngeal obstruction. The tracheostomy is 
commonly done in the retrothyroid region after displacing the 
isthmus of the thyroid gland upwards or downwards.
After displacing the isthmus the trachea is opened by a 
vertical incision in the region of the 3rd and 4th or 2nd and 
3rd tracheal rings. This is then converted into circular opening 
and tracheostomy tube is inserted.
If the tracheostomy is performed above the isthmus it is 
called high tracheostomy and if it is performed below the 
isthmus it is called low tracheostomy.
The low tracheostomy is risky in children owing to shortness 
of the neck and presence of thymus and left brachiocephalic 
vein and sometimes brachiocephalic artery. These structures, 
if injured, will cause alarming hemorrhage.
Clinical correlation
ESOPHAGUS
The esophagus is 25 cm long muscular tube, which connects 
pharynx with the stomach. The esophagus is kept collapsed 
anteroposteriorly between trachea and vertebral column. Its 
expansion occurs only when bolus of food passes through it.
The esophagus begins as a continuation of pharynx at the 
lower border of cricoid cartilage opposite the lower border 
of C6 vertebra.
It passes downwards in front of the vertebral column 
behind trachea, traverses superior and posterior mediastina of 
thorax, passes through the esophageal opening of the 
diaphragm and ends at the cardiac orifice of the stomach in 
the abdomen about 2.5 cm to the left of the median plane.
The esophagus is divided into three parts: cervical, thoracic,
and abdominal.
N.B. The pharyngoesophageal junction is the narrowest 
part of the digestive tube except that of the vermiform 
appendix.
CERVICAL PART OF THE ESOPHAGUS
It extends from the lower border of cricoid cartilage to the 
superior border of manubrium sterni. It begins in the 
midline but inclines slightly to the left as it descends.
--- Page 181 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
Relations of the Cervical Part of the Esophagus
Anteriorly, it is related to:
(a) trachea and
(b) recurrent laryngeal nerve.
Posteriorly, it is related to:
(a) prevertebral fascia,
(b) longus colli muscles, and
(c) vertebral column.
N.B. The prevertebral layer of deep cervical fascia 
forms a movable base on which the trachea and 
esophagus move up and down during swallowing and 
phonation.
On each side, it is related to:
(a) lobe of the thyroid gland,
(b) common carotid artery, and
(c) thoracic duct on the left side.
BLOOD SUPPLY AND LYMPHATIC DRAINAGE
The cervical part of the esophagus is supplied by the inferior 
thyroid arteries.
The veins from this part drain into inferior thyroid veins 
and left brachiocephalic vein.
The lymph vessels from the cervical part of esophagus 
drain into pretracheal and deep cervical lymph nodes.
• The left margin of the esophagus projects laterally from 
behind the trachea in the region of the neck. Therefore the 
cervical part of esophagus can be mobilized and exposed 
surgically more easily from the left side.
• The interior of the esophagus can be examined in vivo by 
esophagoscope. This procedure helps to obtain tissue 
biopsy or removal of swallowed foreign body.
Clinical correlation
For the thoracic and abdominal part of the esophagus, see 
Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax, Vol. I by 
Vishram Singh.
--- Page 182 ---
Thyroid and Parathyroid Glands, Trachea, and Esophagus
Golden Facts to Remember
  Largest endocrine gland of the body
Thyroid gland
  Earliest glandular tissue to develop and become 
functional
Thyroid tissue
  Most vascular endocrine gland in the body
Thyroid gland (adrenal medulla is also equally 
vascular)
  Most common form of incomplete descent of 
thyroid
Lingual thyroid
  Most common site of thyroglossal cyst
Subhyoid
  Most common cause of hypercalcemia in adult
Primary hyperparathyroidism
  Most common mode of clinical presentation of 
hyperparathyroidism
Renal stones
  Most common cause of hypoparathyroidism
Inadvertent removal during surgery, e.g., 
thyroidectomy
  Most preferred site of the tracheostomy
2nd or 3rd tracheal rings
  Commonest site of the cancer esophagus
Middle one-third of esophagus
  Most common site of the adenocarcinoma of 
esophagus
Lower one-third
A 55-year-old woman complained of midline nodular 
swelling on the front of her neck, which moved up and 
down during swallowing. On physical examination, it 
was found that she had slight tremors on outstretched 
hands, her pulse rate was 11 per minute, B.P. 
150/100 mmHg and there was slight bulging of her 
eyes. She also told that she had lost weight and felt 
feverish. She was diagnosed as a case of toxic goitre.
Questions
1. What is goitre?
2. Why thyroid swellings move up and down during 
swallowing?
3. Mention the anatomical basis of high body 
temperature, weight loss, high blood pressure, and 
exophthalmos.
Answers
1. Any enlargement of the thyroid gland except that 
during menstruation and lactation is called 
goitre.
2. The thyroid gland is enclosed in pretracheal fascia 
which anchors the gland with laryngeal cartilages 
(e.g., thyroid and cricoid). Since larynx moves up 
and down during swallowing, hence thyroid 
swelling also moves with it.
3. Toxic goitre is associated with hypersecretion of 
the thyroid hormones, which increases the rate of 
metabolism leading to high body temperature, 
weight 
loss, 
high 
blood 
pressure, 
exophthalmos.
Clinical Case Study
--- Page 183 ---
Pre- and Paravertebral 
Regions and Root of the 
Neck
CHAPTER
The prevertebral region of the neck extends from first 
cervical vertebra to the upper two thoracic vertebrae. The 
upper two thoracic vertebrae are included because they 
are visible in the background of the root of the neck due 
to forward slope of the superior thoracic aperture. The 
paravertebral region lies on either side of prevertebral 
region and extends from transverse process of first 
cervical vertebra to the first rib. The root of the neck is 
defined as the area of the neck immediately above the 
thoracic inlet (Fig. 12.1). The structures encountered in 
these regions include anterior and lateral vertebral 
muscles, cervical plexus, cervical sympathetic chain, and 
large vessels.
PREVERTEBRAL (ANTERIOR
VERTEBRAL) MUSCLES
The anterior vertebral muscles lie in front of the cervical part 
of the vertebral column. All of them are covered by 
prevertebral fascia and supplied by ventral rami of cervical 
nerves. They form the posterior boundary of the 
retropharyngeal space. As a group, they flex the neck and the 
head on the neck.
The anterior vertebral group of muscles include (Figs 12.2 
and 12.3):
1. Rectus capitis anterior.
2. Rectus capitis lateralis.
Fig. 12.1 Bony features in the pre- and paravertebral 
regions and the root of the neck.
Occipital condyle
Scalene tubercle
First rib
Jugular process of
occipital bone
Lateral mass of 
atlas
Groove for
subclavian artery
Bony ridge
Groove for
subclavian vein
Fig. 12.2 Attachments of the anterior vertebral muscles.
Inferior
oblique part
Middle
vertical part
Superior
oblique part
LONGUS COLLI
Rectus capitis lateralis
Rectus capitis anterior
Jugular process of
occipital bone
Atlas
Occipital condyle
--- Page 184 ---
Pre- and Paravertebral Regions and Root of the Neck
3. Longus cervicis (longus colli).
4. Longus capitis.
Rectus capitis anterior (Fig. 12.2)
It arises from the anterior surface of the lateral mass of the 
atlas, extends upwards and slightly medially to be inserted on 
the inferior surface of the basiocciput just in front of the 
occipital condyle.
Rectus capitis lateralis (Fig. 12.2)
It arises from the upper surface of the transverse process of 
the atlas, runs upwards and laterally to be inserted on the 
inferior surface of the jugular process of the occipital bone. It 
is separated from rectus capitis anterior by the ventral ramus 
of the 1st cervical nerve, which supplies both these muscles.
Longus cervicis (longus colli; Fig. 12.2)
This is the longest and medial of the prevertebral muscles. It 
extends from anterior tubercle of the atlas to the anterior 
aspect of the 3rd thoracic vertebra.
The longus colli consists of three parts, viz.
1. Upper oblique part.
2. Lower oblique part.
3. Middle vertical part.
The upper oblique part arises from anterior tubercles of 
transverse processes of C3, C4, and C5 vertebrae, passes 
upwards and medially to be inserted on the anterior arch of 
the atlas to the side of the anterior tubercle.
The middle vertical part arises from the front of bodies of 
the upper three thoracic and lower three cervical vertebrae 
and ascends up, to be inserted on the front of the bodies of 
the 2nd, 3rd, and 4th cervical vertebrae.
The inferior oblique part is the smallest. It arises from 
front of the bodies of the upper 2 or 3 thoracic vertebrae, 
runs upwards and laterally to be inserted onto the anterior 
tubercles of the transverse processes of the 5th and 6th 
cervical vertebrae.
Nerve supply: The longus colli is supplied segmentally by 
branches from anterior primary rami of C2 to C6 spinal 
nerves.
Actions: It bends the neck forwards. In addition, upper 
oblique part may flex the neck laterally and lower oblique 
part rotates the neck to the opposite side.
Longus capitis (Fig. 12.3)
It arises from anterior tubercles of the transverse processes of 
C3, C4, C5, and C6 vertebrae, corresponding to the origin of 
scalenus anterior muscle and inserted on the inferior surface 
of the basilar part of the occipital bone along the side of 
pharyngeal tubercle. It is narrow below and thick above, and 
overlaps the longus colli (cervicis) muscle.
Nerve supply: It is supplied by branches of anterior primary 
rami of C1, C2, and C3 spinal nerves.
Actions: Longus capitis flexes the head.
PARAVERTEBRAL (LATERAL 
VERTEBRAL) MUSCLES
The paravertebral muscles extend from transverse processes 
of cervical vertebrae to the upper two ribs. They can, there-
fore, either elevate these ribs or bend the cervical part of the 
vertebral column laterally.
These muscles form a thick mass behind the prevertebral 
fascia and supplied by twigs from ventral rami of the lower 5 
or 6 cervical spinal nerves.
The lateral vertebral group of muscles consists of scalene 
muscles.
The scalene muscles, usually three in number, are as 
follows:
1. Scalenus posterior.
2. Scalenus medius.
3. Scalenus anterior.
N.B. The scalenus medius is the largest and scalenus poste-
rior is the smallest.
Scalenus Posterior (Fig. 12.4)
It is smallest and most deeply situated.
Fig. 12.3 Attachment of the longus capitis muscle.
LONGUS
CAPITIS
Basilar part of occipital bone
Pharyngeal
tubercle
--- Page 185 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
Origin
From posterior tubercles of the transverse processes of C4, 
C5, and C6 vertebrae.
Insertion
On to the outer surface of second rib, behind the tubercle for 
serratus anterior.
Nerve supply
By ventral rami of the lower three cervical (C6, C7, and C8) 
spinal nerves.
Actions
1. When the 2nd rib is fixed, it bends the cervical vertebral 
column to the same side.
2. When upper attachment is fixed, it helps to elevate the 
2nd rib and thus acts as an accessory muscle of 
respiration.
Scalenus Medius (Fig. 12.5)
It is longest and largest of all the scalene muscles.
Origin
From posterior tubercles of the transverse processes of C2–
C6 cervical vertebrae.
Insertion
On to the upper surface of the first rib between the tubercle 
of the rib and groove for subclavian artery.
Nerve supply
By ventral rami of C3–C8 spinal nerves.
Actions
1. When first rib is fixed, it bends the neck to the same side.
2. When upper end is fixed, it elevates the first rib and thus 
acts as an accessory muscle of respiration.
Scalenus Anterior (Fig. 12.6)
It is most superficial and lies deep to sternocleidomastoid 
muscle. It is the key muscle at the root of neck because of its 
intimate relations to many structures in this region. It 
provides a useful surgical landmark.
Origin
From anterior tubercles of transverse processes of C3, C4, 
C5, and C6 vertebrae (i.e., all typical vertebrae).
Fig. 12.4 Attachments of the scalenus posterior muscle.
First rib
Tubercle for serratus anterior
Second rib
SCALENUS POSTERIOR
Fig. 12.5 Attachments of the scalenus medius muscle.
Tubercle of
first rib
Groove for
subclavian artery
SCALENUS MEDIUS
Upper surface of
first rib
Fig. 12.6 Attachments of the scalenus anterior muscle.
First rib
SCALENUS
ANTERIOR
--- Page 186 ---
Pre- and Paravertebral Regions and Root of the Neck
Insertion
The fibres converge and descend almost vertically to be 
inserted by a narrow, flat tendon to the scalene tubercle on 
the inner border of the 1st rib and to the ridge on the upper 
surface of the rib anterior to the groove for the subclavian 
artery.
Nerve supply
By ventral rami of C4, C5, and C6 spinal nerves.
Actions
1. Acting from below, it bends the neck forwards and 
laterally and rotates it to the opposite side.
2. Acting from above, it helps to elevate the 1st rib and thus 
acts as an accessory muscle of respiration.
Relations of the scalenus anterior muscle (Fig. 12.7)
The scalenus anterior muscle forms an important 
landmark at the root of the neck because phrenic nerve 
passes superficial to it, subclavian artery deep to it and 
brachial plexus lies at its lateral border.
Therefore the relations of scalenus anterior muscle are 
very important.
Anterior relations:
1. Phrenic nerve runs downward across the anterior 
surface of the muscle deep to prevertebral fascia.
2. Two arteries—transverse cervical and suprascapular—
cross the anterior surface of muscle from medial to 
lateral side.
3. Two veins
(a) Anterior jugular vein crosses the muscle from above 
downwards.
(b) Subclavian vein crosses the anterior surface near 
insertion from lateral to medial side.
4. Two muscles
(a) Inferior belly of omohyoid crosses the anterior 
surface from medial to lateral side.
(b) Sternocleidomastoid (clavicular head) overlaps the 
muscle.
5. Carotid sheath lies vertically in front of the muscle.
6. Clavicle crosses from medial to lateral side.
Posterior relations:
1. Roots of brachial plexus separates the scalenus anterior 
from scalenus medius.
2. Subclavian artery passes deep to scalenus anterior near 
its insertion from medial to lateral side, separating it 
from scalenus medius.
3. Scalenus medius muscle (medial part).
4. Cervical pleura.
5. Suprapleural membrane.
Other relations:
1. The medial border of scalenus anterior forms the lateral 
boundary of the scalenovertebral triangle or triangle of 
the vertebral artery. The contents of this triangle form 
the medial relations of the scalenus anterior.
2. The lateral border of the scalenus anterior is related to 
trunks of brachial plexus, which emerge underneath it.
3. The upper part of scalenus anterior is separated from 
longus capitis by the ascending cervical artery.
SCALENE (SUBCLAVIAN) TRIANGLE (Fig. 12.8)
It is a narrow triangular gap above the 1st rib between 
scalenus anterior and scalenus medius. The subclavian artery 
and brachial plexus pass through this space.
Fig. 12.7 Schematic sagittal section to show the anterior 
and posterior relations of the scalenus anterior muscle.
Posterior relations
Subclavian artery
Scalenus
medius muscle
Suprapleural
membrane
Cervical pleura
Roots of
brachial plexus
Anterior relations
Sternocleidomastoid
Carotid sheath
Phrenic nerve
Inferior belly of
omohyoid
Transverse
cervical artery
Suprascapular
artery
Anterior
jugular vein
Subclavian vein
Prevertebral fascia
Scalenus
anterior
Fig. 12.8 Scalene triangle.
Scalenus
anterior muscle
Scalenus
medius muscle
Lower trunk of
brachial plexus
Subclavian
artery
First rib
Subclavian
vein
--- Page 187 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
Scalene syndrome: It consists of group of signs and 
symptoms produced due to compression of lower trunk of 
brachial plexus (C8 and T1) and subclavian artery in the 
scalene triangle either due to raising of its base by the 
cervical rib, if present, or due to spasm of scalene muscles. 
Clinically, this syndrome presents as:
(a) tingling sensation and numbness along the inner 
border of forearm and hand, i.e., along the distribution 
of C8 and T1 spinal nerves,
(b) progressive paresis and wasting of intrinsic muscles of 
the hand (most of them are supplied by C8 and T1 
spinal nerves), and
(c) ischemic pain and absence of radial pulse due to 
compression of subclavian artery.
Clinical correlation
SCALENOVERTEBRAL TRIANGLE (TRIANGLE OF 
VERTEBRAL ARTERY; Fig. 12.9)
It is a deeply placed triangular space at the root of the neck 
between scalenus anterior laterally and longus colli (cervicis) 
medially. The cervical pleura and apex of lung project 
upward into this space.
Boundaries:
Medial: 
Lower oblique part of the longus colli.
Lateral: 
Medial border of scalenus anterior.
Apex: 
Transverse process of C6 vertebra.
Base: 
First part of the subclavian artery.
Floor (posterior wall): From above downwards, it is formed 
(a) transverse process of C7 vertebra,
(b) ventral ramus of C8 spinal nerve, 
which passes laterally above the 
neck of first rib,
(c) neck of first rib, and
(d) cupola of cervical pleura.
Roof: 
It is formed by carotid sheath.
Contents:
1. First part of vertebral artery and accompanying veins.
The artery extends upwards vertically from the base to 
enter the foramen transversarium of C6 at the apex.
2. Thyrocervical trunk and inferior thyroid artery; the 
later arches medially across the apical part of the 
triangle.
3. Sympathetic chain with stellate ganglion lies posterolat-
eral to vertebral artery.
4. Thoracic duct on the left side arches laterally at the level 
of transverse process of C7 vertebra.
5. Ansa subclavia.
N.B. Scalenus minimus (pleuralis): The scalenus minimus is 
the fourth rudimentary scalene muscle.
It arises from the anterior border of the transverse process 
of C7 vertebra and inserted to the inner border of the 1st rib 
behind the groove for the subclavian artery and to the dome 
of the cervical pleura.
The suprapleural membrane is regarded as the flattened 
tendon of this muscle.
The contraction of scalenus minimus pulls up the dome 
of pleura to make it tense.
CERVICAL PLEXUS
Formation
It is formed by ventral rami of the upper four cervical nerves. 
The position of rami of cervical spinal nerves in relation to 
paravertebral muscles is shown in Figure 12.10. The ventral 
Fig. 12.9 Boundaries and contents of triangle of vertebral 
artery.
Transverse
process of
C6 vertebra
Middle cervical
sympathetic
ganglion
Vertebral artery
Inferior oblique
part of longus
colli
Inferior cervical
sympathetic
(stellate)
ganglion
Subclavian artery
(first part)
Scalenus
anterior
Inferior
thyroid
artery
Ansa
subclavia
Transverse
cervical artery
Suprascapular
artery
Fig. 12.10 Position of rami of cervical spinal nerve in 
relation to prevertebral muscles.
Dorsal ramus
Levator
scapulae
Scalenus
medius
Ventral
ramus
Prevertebral fascia
Scalenus anterior
--- Page 188 ---
Pre- and Paravertebral Regions and Root of the Neck
rami of C2–C4 divide into upper and lower branches. 
The ventral ramus of C1 and branches of C2–C4 ventral 
rami are connected with one another to form three loops, 
hence cervical plexus is also called plexus of loops. The first
loop is directed forwards in front of the transverse process of 
atlas and the remaining two loops are directed backwards 
(Fig. 12.11).
Position and relations
The cervical plexus lies on levator scapulae and scalenus 
medius muscles deep to prevertebral fascia, internal jugular 
vein, and sternocleidomastoid.
Branches (Figs 12.11 and 12.12)
The cervical plexus supplies skin and muscles of the neck, 
and the thoracoabdominal diaphragm. Its branches are 
arranged into superficial and deep groups.
Superficial (cutaneous) branches are as follows:
1. Lesser occipital nerve (C2).
2. Great auricular nerve (C2, C3).
3. Transverse (anterior) cervical nerve (C2, C3).
4. Supraclavicular nerve (C3, C4).
Deep branches are as follows:
1. Communicating branches, viz.:
(a) Grey rami communicantes from superior cervical 
sympathetic ganglion to all the 4 roots.
(b) A branch of C1 joins the hypoglossal nerve.
(c) A branch from C2 to sternocleidomastoid and 
branches from C3–C4 to trapezius communicate 
with spinal accessory nerve.
2. Muscular branches: The following muscles are supplied 
by cervical plexus:
(a) Rectus capitis anterior (C1).
(b) Rectus capitis lateralis (C1, C2).
(c) Longus capitis (C1–C3).
(d) Longus colli (C2–C4).
(e) Strap muscles (C1–C3).
(f) Sternocleidomastoid (C2).
(g) Trapezius (C3, C4).
(h) Levator scapulae (C3, C4).
(i) Scalene muscles (C3, C4).
(j) Diaphragm (C3, C4).
ANSA CERVICALIS
It is described in detail on page 92.
PHRENIC NERVE
Origin 
It arises from ventral rami of C3, C4, and C5 but chiefly from 
Course
It runs vertically downwards on the anterior surface of the 
scalenus anterior, which it crosses obliquely from lateral to 
medial side. Then it runs downwards on the cervical pleura 
to enter the thorax behind first costal cartilage.
Distribution
The phrenic nerve provides:
(a) sole motor supply to the diaphragm (muscle of 
respiration), and
(b) sensory innervation to diaphragmatic pleura, pericardium, 
and subdiaphragmatic pleura.
Fig. 12.12 Cervical plexus with its communicating branches.
Fig. 12.11 Cervical plexus with loops and its cutaneous 
branches.
Lesser
occipital
nerve (C2)
Supraclavicular
nerve
Great auricular
nerve (C2, C3)
Transverse
process of atlas
Transverse (anterior)
cervical nerve (C2, C3)
Spinal segment
First loop
Phrenic nerve
Superior root of
ansa cervicalis
Inferior root of
ansa cervicalis
Phrenic nerve
Ansa cervicalis
To trapezius (C3, C4)
Spinal
accessory
nerve
To sternocleidomastoid (C2)
To rectus capitis anterior and
rectus capitis lateralis
Hypoglossal nerve
--- Page 189 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
Accessory phrenic nerve
It is the branch from nerve to subclavius containing C5 fibres. 
It runs lateral to phrenic nerve and descends behind or 
sometimes in front of the subclavian vein to join the main 
phrenic nerve near the 1st rib.
N.B. In case of accessory phrenic nerve, the fibres of C5 
nerve inspite of joining the phrenic nerve at its 
commencement runs through, nerve to subclavius and then 
leaves it as accessory nerve to join the main phrenic nerve at 
the thoracic inlet.
Phrenic crush/avulsion: Before the advent of modern 
antitubercular treatment, phrenic crush used to be done to 
produce paralysis of the corresponding half of the dia-
phragm in order to provide rest to the diseased lung and 
thus promote healing.
In phrenic crush the accessory phrenic nerve, if present, 
should also be crushed, otherwise C5 fibres will escape and 
diaphragm will continue to function.
Clinical correlation
CERVICAL PART OF THE 
SYMPATHETIC TRUNK (Fig. 12.13)
The two sympathetic trunks (right and left) extend from the 
base of the skull to the base of coccyx, where they join to 
form ganglion impar.
The cervical part of sympathetic trunk, one on either side 
of cervical part of the vertebral column lies in front of the 
transverse processes of cervical vertebrae and neck of the 1st 
rib behind the carotid sheaths and in front of prevertebral 
fascia.
Each trunk is continuous upwards into the cranial cavity 
as the internal carotid nerve accompanying the internal 
carotid artery. Inferiorly, it becomes continuous with the 
thoracic part of the sympathetic chain at the neck of the 1st 
rib.
The cervical part of sympathetic trunk does not receive 
the preganglionic fibres through white rami communicantes 
from the cervical segments of the spinal cord, but it does give 
grey rami communicantes to all the cervical spinal nerves. 
Each trunk receives preganglionic fibres from lateral horn 
cells of T1–T4 spinal segments.
CERVICAL SYMPATHETIC GANGLIA
There are three cervical sympathetic ganglia: superior, 
middle, and inferior. They are formed by the fusion of eight 
primitive ganglia, corresponding to eight cervical nerves. 
The characteristics of these ganglia are as follows:
1. Superior cervical ganglion
(a) It is the largest of the cervical sympathetic ganglion.
(b) It is spindle-shaped and about 2.5 cm long.
(c) It lies just below the skull, in front of transverse 
processes of C2 and C3 vertebrae, behind the carotid 
sheath and in front of the prevertebral fascia.
(d) It is formed by the fusion of four primitive cervical 
ganglia.
2. Middle cervical ganglion
(a) It is very small and often absent.
(b) It lies in the lower part of the neck, in front of 
transverse process of C6 just above the inferior 
thyroid artery.
(c) It is formed by the fusion of the 5th and 6th 
primitive cervical ganglia.
3. Inferior cervical ganglion
(a) It is formed by the fusion of the 7th and 8th 
primitive cervical ganglia.
(b) It is generally fused with the 1st thoracic ganglion to 
form the cervicothoracic ganglion; it is also called 
stellate ganglion because of its star-shaped 
appearance.
Plexus around
internal carotid
artery
Internal carotid
nerve
Grey rami
communicantes
to ventral rami of
cervical nerves
Plexus around
vertebral artery
Plexus around
subclavian artery
Ansa subclavia
Esophageal branches
Inferior cervical
cardiac branch
Inferior (stellate) cervical
sympathetic ganglion
Middle cervical
cardiac branch
Plexus around inferior
thyroid artery
Superior cervical
cardiac branch
Pharyngeal branch
Superior cervical
sympathetic ganglion
Plexus around
external carotid
artery
Muller’s
muscle
Constrictor
pupillae
Dilator
pupillae
Middle cervical
sympathetic
ganglion
Fig. 12.13 Cervical sympathetic trunk and its branches.
--- Page 190 ---
Pre- and Paravertebral Regions and Root of the Neck
(c) It lies between transverse process of C7 and the neck 
of the rib.
Branches
Each of the three ganglia gives three common types of 
branches, viz.
1. Grey rami communicantes to cervical nerves.
2. A cardiac branch/nerve.
3. A branch/branches to form a plexus around an artery.
Branches of Superior Ganglion
These are as follows:
1. Grey rami communicantes to ventral rami of upper four 
cervical nerves.
2. Superior cardiac nerve.
3. Carotid branches form sympathetic plexus around 
internal and external carotid arteries.
In addition to the above mentioned branches, superior 
ganglion also gives rise to a pharyngeal branch, which takes 
part in the formation of pharyngeal plexus of nerves.
Branches from Middle Ganglion
These are as follows:
1. Grey rami communicantes to ventral rami of C5 and C6 
spinal nerves.
2. Thyroid branches to form a plexus around the inferior 
thyroid artery.
3. Middle cervical cardiac nerve.
In addition to the above mentioned branches, the middle 
cervical ganglion also gives rise to tracheal and esophageal 
branches.
Branches from Inferior Ganglion
These are as follows:
1. Grey rami communicantes to ventral rami of C7 and C8 
spinal nerves.
2. Inferior cervical cardiac nerve.
3. Vertebral and subclavian branches, which form plexus 
around vertebral and subclavian arteries, respectively.
N.B. Ansa subclavia is a nerve loop around subclavian 
artery connecting middle and inferior cervical ganglia.
Horner’s syndrome: The head and neck region is supplied 
by the sympathetic fibres, which arise in the upper thoracic 
spinal segments. These preganglionic fibres pass through 
stellate ganglion to relay in the superior cervical sympathetic 
ganglion. The postganglionic fibres arise from cells of this 
ganglion and supply the structures in the head and neck.
An injury to cervical sympathetic trunk produces a clinical 
condition called Horner’s syndrome.
Characteristic features (Fig. 12.14)
– Partial ptosis (partial drooping of upper eyelid), due to 
paralysis of smooth part of levator palpebrae superioris 
muscle (Muller’s muscle).
– Miosis, i.e., constriction of the pupil, due to paralysis of 
dilator pupillae.
– Anhydrosis, i.e., loss of sweating on that side of face, due 
to sudomotor and vasoconstrictor denervation.
– Increased temperature and redness.
– Enophthalmos, i.e., sunken eyeball, not confirmed by 
ophthalmometry.
– Loss of ciliospinal refl ex, i.e., pinching the skin of the back 
of neck does not produce dilation of the pupil, which in 
healthy person takes place.
Clinical correlation
ROOT OF THE NECK
The root of the neck is defined as the area of the neck 
immediately above the thoracic inlet. The thoracic inlet is a 
space bounded by 1st thoracic vertebra, 1st rib, and 
manubrium sterni. The structures pass both into and out of 
the thoracic cavity through this space (Fig. 12.15).
The clinical importance of this area is that the numerous 
important structures, such as carotid and subclavian 
arteries, the trachea and esophagus, and large veins are all 
packed together into this relatively small space. Therefore, 
any further decrease in this space may lead to dire 
consequences. The reduction in space may be caused by a 
number of clinical conditions such as tumor of apex of lung 
(Pancoast tumor), enlarged thyroid gland, cervical rib, etc. 
The students should read this region very carefully.
The following structures merit description in detail:
1. Scalenovertebral triangle/triangle of vertebral artery 
(see page 172).
2. Scalene/subclavian triangle (see page 171).
3. Cervical pleura.
CERVICAL PLEURA
The cervical pleura covers the apex of the lung at the root of 
the neck. It rises into the root of the neck about 3.4 cm above 
the 1st costal cartilage but not above the neck of the first rib 
due to obliquity of the 1st rib. It rises 2.5 cm above the medial 
third of the clavicle.
Fig. 12.14 Horner’s syndrome (left side).
Partial ptosis
Constriction of
pupil (miosis)
Enophthalmos
--- Page 191 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
The cervical pleura is strengthened by the suprapleural 
membrane (also called Sibson’s fascia) so that the root of the 
neck is not puffed up and down during respiration.
Relations
Anterior:
1. Subclavian artery.
2. Scalenus anterior.
Posterior:
Neck of first rib and structures crossing in front of it.
Lateral:
1. Scalenus medius.
2. Lower trunk of brachial plexus.
Medial:
1. Vertebral bodies.
2. Trachea and esophagus.
3. Recurrent laryngeal nerve in the tracheoesophageal 
groove.
4. Thoracic duct on the left side.
5. Large blood vessels of the neck.
N.B. Structures crossing in front of the neck of 1st rib from 
medial to lateral side are:
• Sympathetic chain.
• First posterior intercostal vein.
• Superior intercostal artery.
• First thoracic nerve (large ascending branch of its ventral 
ramus).
LYMPH TRUNKS AT THE ROOT OF THE NECK
The lymph from head and neck region is returned to the 
venous blood via left and right lymph trunks, which converge 
at the root of neck at the junction of internal jugular and 
subclavian veins. The various lymph trunks which converge 
on the right and left side of the root of the neck are as 
described in the following text:
On the right side of neck—the three trunks that converge 
are as follows:
1. Right jugular trunk extends along the ventrolateral 
aspect of the internal jugular vein. It drains lymph from 
right half of the head and neck.
2. Right subclavian trunk extends along the axillary and 
subclavian veins and draws lymph from the right upper 
limb and superficial tissues of the right half of the 
thoracoabdominal wall down to the umbilicus anteriorly 
and iliac crest posteriorly.
3. Right bronchomediastinal trunk ascends over the 
trachea. It drains lymph from right lung, bronchi and 
trachea, and right half of the mediastinum.
The right jugular and subclavian trunks may unite 
to form right lymphatic duct, which ends in a similar 
way to that of the thoracic duct (see page 177).
Fig. 12.15 Deep structures at the root of the neck.
Middle cervical sympathetic ganglion
Scalenus medius
Scalenus anterior
Vertebral artery
Inferior thyroid artery
Phrenic nerve
Thoracic duct
Transverse cervical artery
Suprascapular artery
Subclavian artery
Internal jugular vein
Subclavian vein
Trachea
Esophagus
Recurrent laryngeal nerve
Inferior cervical
sympathetic ganglion
Upper
Middle
Lower
Longus colli
Dorsal scapular artery
Left common carotid artery
Trunks of
brachial plexus
--- Page 192 ---
Pre- and Paravertebral Regions and Root of the Neck
Fig. 12.16 Transverse section of the root of neck showing relationship of various structures in this region.
On the left side—the four trunks that converge are as follows:
1. Left Jugular trunk drains lymph from left half of the 
head and neck. Its course and termination is similar to 
that on the right side.
2. Left subclavian trunk drains the lymph from the left 
upper limb and left half of thoracoabdominal wall in the 
same way as that of right subclavian trunk.
3. Left bronchomediastinal trunk is similar to that of the 
right trunk but drains more of the heart and esophagus.
4. Thoracic duct begins in the abdomen as an upward 
continuation of cisterna chyli at the lower border of the 
12th thoracic vertebra. It enters the thoracic inlet along 
the left border of the esophagus. In the neck, it arches 
laterally at the level of the transverse process of the 7th 
cervical vertebra.
Its arch rises 3 or 4 cm above the clavicle and curves 
anteriorly in front of the vertebral system (i.e., vertebral 
artery and vertebral vein) and left sympathetic trunk 
and behind the carotid system (i.e., left common carotid 
artery, left internal jugular vein and left vagus nerve). 
Finally, the duct descends in front of the arched (first 
part) subclavian artery and ends by opening into the 
junction of the left subclavian and internal jugular veins 
(Fig. 12.15).
Relations of the thoracic duct
The relations of the thoracic duct arch in the neck 
(Fig. 12.16) are as follows:
Anterior:
1. Left common carotid artery.
2. Left vagus nerve.
3. Left internal jugular vein.
Posterior:
1. Vertebral artery and vein.
2. Sympathetic trunk.
3. Thyrocervical trunk and its branches.
4. Prevertebral fascia.
5. Phrenic nerve.
6. Scalenus anterior muscle.
The thoracic duct is the longest and largest lymphatic trunk 
in the body. It drains the lymph from whole of the body 
except the right upper quadrant (for details see pages 166 
and 167 of General Anatomy by Vishram Singh).
Tributaries in the neck
Apart from the tributaries in the thorax and abdomen, the 
thoracic duct receives the following tributaries in the neck:
1. Left jugular trunk.
2. Left subclavian trunk.
3. Left bronchomediastinal trunk.
RECURRENT LARYNGEAL NERVE
It runs on either side in the tracheo-esophageal groove.
TRACHEA AND ESOPHAGUS
The trachea extends from the lower border of the cricoid 
cartilage at the level of the lower border of C6 vertebra to the 
level of sternal angle at the level of lower border of T4. It can 
be palpated in the midline just above the jugular notch. This 
part of trachea is crossed by the isthmus of thyroid gland, 
inferior thyroid veins, the thyroidea ima artery (if present), 
and jugular venous arch.
Scalenus anterior
Sympathetic chain
Vertebral artery
Vertebral vein
Thoracic duct
Carotid sheath
Esophagus
Recurrent laryngeal nerve
Vagus nerve
Internal jugular vein
Plane of inferior thyroid artery
Scalenus medius
Prevertebral muscle
Trachea
Common
carotid artery
Phrenic nerve
Prevertebral fascia
Scalenus anterior
Ventral ramus of C7 nerve
--- Page 193 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
The esophagus begins in the neck just below the 
cricopharyngeus at the lower border of C6 vertebra. It lies 
on longus colli behind the trachea. The thoracic duct lies 
on its left lateral border before arching over the triangle of 
the vertebral artery on the left side (for details see 
chapter 10).
BRACHIOCEPHALIC VEINS
These veins collect blood from the head and neck, upper 
limbs, thoracic wall, and anterior abdominal wall. Each vein 
is formed by the union of corresponding internal jugular 
and subclavian veins behind the medial end of the clavicle. 
They end by joining to form superior vena cava behind the 
lower border of the right first costal cartilage at the margin 
of the sternum.
The right brachiocephalic vein descends almost vertically. 
In the neck, it lies on the cervical pleura lateral to the 
brachiocephalic trunk. The phrenic nerve and internal 
thoracic artery lie posterior to it whereas anterior to it lie 
sternohyoid and sternothyroid muscles.
The left brachiocephalic vein runs obliquely to pass 
behind the upper part of the manubrium sterni to join the 
right brachiocephalic vein and is therefore much longer.
Both veins receive the vertebral, highest intercostal and 
inferior thyroid veins. The right lymphatic duct, right 
jugular trunk, and right subclavian trunk enter the right 
vein. The thoracic duct and left superior intercostal vein 
enter the left vein.
--- Page 194 ---
Pre- and Paravertebral Regions and Root of the Neck
Golden Facts to Remember
  Longest prevertebral muscle
Longus cervicis
  Longest and largest scalene muscle
Scalenus medius
  Scalenus medius arises from the transverse 
processes of all cervical vertebrae except
Transverse process of 1st cervical vertebra
  Key muscle at the root of the neck
Scalenus anterior
  Largest cervical sympathetic ganglion
Superior cervical sympathetic ganglion
  Cervical rib
Enlarged costal element of transverse process of C7 
vertebra
  Root of the neck
Area of neck immediately above the thoracic inlet
  Stellate ganglion
Cervicothoracic ganglion (p. 174)
  Smallest prevertebral muscle
Scalenus posterior
  Accessory phrenic nerve
A branch of nerve to subclavius containing C5 
fibres, which join the main phrenic nerve
A 19-year-old dental student complained of pain, 
tingling, and numbness along the medial side of her 
right forearm and hand. She also had difficulty in 
gripping the instruments firmly by the right hand. The 
physical examination revealed weak right radial pulse. 
The examining physician suspected the presence of 
cervical rib and performed Adson’s test, which turned 
out to be positive. The presence of cervical rib was 
confirmed by plain X-ray. She was diagnosed as a case 
of scalene syndrome. She completely recovered of her 
symptoms after the surgical removal of the cervical rib.
Questions
1. What is cervical rib?
2. What are the boundaries of scalene triangle?
3. Name the structures passing through scalene 
triangle.
4. Mention the cause of symptoms told by the patient.
5. What is Adson’s test?
6. What precautions should be taken when cervical 
rib is removed surgically?
Answers
1. It is an enlarged costal element of the transverse 
process of the 7th cervical vertebra.
2. It is a narrow triangular space bounded anteriorly 
by scalenus anterior, posteriorly by scalenus medius 
and inferiorly by the upper surface of the first rib.
3. Subclavian artery and lower trunk of the brachial 
plexus.
4. Compression of lower trunk of brachial plexus 
(C8 and T1) and subclavian artery.
5. This test is performed to assess the functional 
status of the arterial supply of the upper limb. The 
patient sitting on a stool is asked to take a deep 
breath and at the same time turn his/her face 
towards the affected side. Now the physician can 
feel the radial pulse. If the radial pulse becomes 
feeble or absent the test is said to be positive.
6. The periosteum of the rib must be removed to 
prevent the regeneration of the rib.
Clinical Case Study
--- Page 196 ---
Oral Cavity
Blood Vessels
Each lip is supplied by labial branches of facial artery. Each 
lip has an arterial arch formed by the end-on anastomosis 
between labial branches of the facial arteries. When this arterial 
arch is cut, blood spurts from both ends with equal force. The 
veins correspond to the arteries and drain into the facial vein.
Lymphatics
The lymphatics from the central part of the lower lip drain into 
submental lymph nodes. The lymphatics from lateral parts of 
lower lip and whole of upper lip drain into submandibular 
lymph nodes.
Nerve Supply
The lips have rich sensory supply from trigeminal nerve. 
The upper lip is supplied by labial branches of the 
infraorbital nerve (a branch of maxillary division) and 
lower lip by the mental nerve (a branch of mandibular 
division of the trigeminal nerve). The red portions of lip 
are highly sensitive and represented by a large area in the 
sensory cortex of cerebral hemisphere.
CHEEKS
The cheeks are fleshy flaps forming a large part of the face. 
Each cheek is continuous in front with the lip. The junction 
between the two is marked by the nasolabial sulcus or the 
nasolabial furrow, which extends from the side of the nose 
to the angle of the mouth. Like the lips, the cheeks are lined 
externally by the skin and internally by the mucus 
membrane.
Structure
The cheek is largely composed of buccinator muscle. In 
addition, it contains buccal glands, blood vessels, and nerves. 
The buccinator muscle is covered by buccopharyngeal 
fascia. The buccal pad of fat is best developed in infants, 
overlies the buccopharyngeal fascia and extends posteriorly 
deep to masseter muscle.
Layers of the Cheek
From superficial to deep, the layers of the cheek are as follows:
1. Skin.
2. Superficial fascia containing some muscles of facial 
expression, viz. zygomaticus major, risorius.
3. Buccal pad of fat.
4. Buccopharyngeal fascia.
5. Buccinator muscle between the alveolar processes of 
both jaws.
6. Submucosa containing buccal (mucus) glands.
7. Mucus membrane.
The last five layers of the cheek are pierced by the parotid duct. 
The lymphatics from cheek drain into the submandibular and 
preauricular lymph nodes.
Mucus lining of the cheek
The inner aspect of the cheek is lined by stratified squamous 
epithelium. It is pierced by parotid duct opposite the 
maxillary upper molar tooth at a small parotid papilla.
A hyperkeratinized line (the linea alba) may be seen at a 
position related to the occlusal plane of the teeth.
In the retromolar region a fold of mucus membrane containing 
pterygomandibular raphe extends between the upper and 
lower alveoli. The entrance to the pterygomandibular space, 
which contains inferior alveolar and lingual nerves, lies lateral 
to pterygomandibular fold and medial to the ridge produced 
by site for injection of anesthetic agent in inferior alveolar 
nerve block.
Clinical correlation
GUMS (GINGIVA)
The gums are composed of fibrous tissue covered with a 
smooth vascular mucous membrane. They envelop the 
alveolar processes of the jaws and the necks of the teeth. At 
the necks of the teeth, the fibrous tissue of gum becomes 
continuous with the periodontal membrane, which attaches 
the teeth to their sockets.
Parts of Gum
The gum/gingiva has three parts, viz.
Free part (free gingiva), which surrounds the neck of tooth 
like a collar.
Attached part (attached gingiva), which is firmly attached 
to the alveolar process.
Interdental part (interdental gingiva), which is the 
extension of the attached gingiva between the teeth.
Nerve Supply
Upper gums on:
(a) the labial aspect are supplied by the posterior, middle, 
and anterior-superior alveolar nerves, and
(b) the lingual aspect are supplied by the greater palatine 
and nasopalatine nerves.
Lower gums on:
(a) the labial aspect are supplied by buccal branch of 
mandibular nerve, and incisive branch of mental nerve, 
(b) the lingual aspect are supplied by the lingual nerves.
--- Page 197 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
Lymphatic Drainage
Upper gums: The lymphatics from upper gums drain into 
submandibular lymph nodes.
Lower gums: The lymphatics from anterior part (i.e., gums 
of lower central incisors) drain into submental lymph nodes 
while those from remaining part drain into submandibular 
lymph nodes.
• Gingivitis: The improper oral hygiene may cause 
inflammation of gums (gingivitis) and suppuration with 
formation of pockets of pus between teeth and gums 
leading to clinical condition called pyorrhea, which 
clinically present as: (a) discharge of pus at the margins of 
gums and (b) foul smell during breathing.
• Scurvy: In scurvy due to deficiency of vitamin C the gums 
become swollen, spongy, and bleed on touch.
Clinical correlation
TEETH
The teeth are mineralized bone-like structures projecting 
from the alveolar processes of the jaws.
Functions of Teeth
The functions of teeth are as follows:
1. Incise and grind the food material during mastication.
2. Perform (sometimes) the role of weapon for defense or 
attack.
3. Provide beauty to the face and means for facial expression.
N.B. The study of teeth, strictly speaking, forms the 
subject of odontology whereas the science concerned 
with the diagnosis and treatment of diseases of the teeth 
and associated structures is called dentistry (L. dens, 
dentis = tooth).
Number of Teeth
In an adult there are 16 permanent teeth in each jaw.
The humans are diphyodont, i.e., two sets of teeth develop 
in a person’s lifetime. The first set of teeth is primary or
deciduous teeth. They begin to form prenatally about 14 weeks 
in intrauterine life and completed postnatally at about 3 
years of age. The deciduous teeth remain intact up to about 6 
years of age. At about that time the permanent teeth begin to 
erupt in the mouth.
The first of milk teeth (lower central incisors) erupt 
approximately 6 months after birth and the last (second 
milk molars) at approximately 2 years. The first permanent 
tooth (first molar) erupts at approximately 6 years and 
continues until about 17 years of age. The wisdom teeth are 
less predictable and if they do erupt, it is between the ages 
17 and 25. Because jaws are formed by this time and other 
teeth have already well-occupied their place, the eruption of 
wisdom teeth may fail to occur properly causing a clinical 
condition called impaction of tooth.
Eruption of Teeth
Most of the teeth in an adult are successional, i.e., they have 
succeeded a corresponding number of milk teeth. The 
permanent molars, however, are accessional, as they have 
been added later on and have no corresponding milk teeth.
Eruption of Deciduous Teeth (Fig. 13.2A)
The deciduous teeth begin to erupt at about 6 months and 
all are erupted by the end of 2nd year (or soon after).
The teeth of lower jaw erupt somewhat before the 
corresponding teeth in the upper jaw.
The approximate age of eruption of deciduous teeth is as 
follows (Fig. 13.2A):
 Lower central incisors: 6 months
 Upper central incisors: 7 months
 Lateral incisors: 8–9 months
 First molar: 12 months (1 year)
 Canines: 18 months (1 year 6 months)
 Second molars: 24 months (2 years)
Eruption of Permanent Teeth (Fig. 13.2B)
The permanent teeth begin to erupt at about 6 years and all 
get erupted by 18–24 years. The approximate age of eruption 
of permanent teeth is as follows:
 First molar: 6 years
 Medial incisors: 7 years
 Lateral incisors: 8 years
 First premolar: 9 years
 Second premolar: 10 years
 Canines: 11 years
 Second molars: 12 years
 Third molar (Wisdom tooth): 18–24 years
Eruption of teeth: The time of eruption of the teeth is a 
useful stepping stone in a child’s development. The time of 
eruption is also important in forensic medicine to estimate 
the age at the time of death from the skeletonized remains 
as a rough guide. The time of eruption of teeth can be 
thought of in ‘6’ or multiples of ‘6’ as follows:
– 1st lower deciduous incisor appears at: 6 months.
– All the deciduous teeth complete eruption by: 24 months.
– Permanent 1st molar appears at: 6 years.
– Permanent 1st incisor appears at: 6 years.
– Permanent 2nd molar appears at: 12 years.
– Permanent 3rd molar appears at: 18–24 years.
Clinical correlation
--- Page 199 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
layer of tall columnar cells called odontoblasts. The space 
occupying the pulp is called pulp cavity.
2. Dentine: It is a calcified material surrounding the pulp 
cavity. It forms the basis of the tooth and contains spiral 
tubules radiating from the pulp cavity. Each tubule is 
occupied by a protoplasmic process from the 
odontoblast. In dentine the calcium and organic matter
are in same proportion as the bone.
Enamel: It is the densely calcified white material covering 
the crown of the tooth. It is the hardest substance in the 
body and is made up of crystalline prisms. The prisms lie 
at right angle to the surface of the tooth.
4. Cement: It is the bony covering over the neck and root 
of the tooth. It commonly overlaps the lower part of the 
enamel.
5. Periodontal membrane: It is present between the 
cementum and the socket, both of which act as 
periosteum. It holds the tooth in the socket and therefore, 
often termed periodontal ligament.
• Medicolegal importance of teeth: The tooth is the 
hardest and chemically most stable tissue in the body. 
Hence, they are presented or fossilized after death for 
medicolegal purpose to identify the unrecognizable dead 
bodies.
• The gradual decalcification and destruction of enamel and 
dentine leads to dental caries.
• Eye tooth: The upper canine tooth is often referred to as 
eye tooth because sometimes its long root may extend up 
to the medial angle of the eye. The infection from its root 
may reach the facial vein, which may lead to cavernous 
sinus thrombosis.
Clinical correlation
Nerve Supply (Fig. 13.5)
The upper teeth are supplied by the posterior, middle, and 
anterior-superior alveolar nerves, which form a plexus above 
the apices of the teeth, called superior dental plexus.
The lower teeth are supplied by the inferior alveolar 
(dental) nerve. The molars and premolars are supplied by 
the main trunk while canine and incisors by its incisive 
branch.
Dental anesthesia: It is required to carry out various dental 
procedures.
(a) Anesthesia of upper teeth: Alveolar bone of the 
maxilla is relatively porous, hence anesthetic solution 
deposited in the gingivae opposite a root of tooth will 
readily penetrate the bone to anesthetize the tooth to 
carry out dental procedures.
Infiltration on buccal aspect is sufficient for painless 
drilling of the tooth but for extraction of tooth the palatal 
aspect must be infiltrated as well. 
(b) Anesthesia of lower teeth: The infiltration anesthesia 
is usually effective for the incisor teeth only. The 
infiltration anesthesia does not work for other 
mandibular teeth because they are embedded in the 
bone, which is dense, hence does not allow the 
sufficient penetration of anesthetic agent. Therefore, 
for those teeth the inferior alveolar nerve block is 
required.
Clinical correlation
Arterial Supply
The upper teeth are supplied by posterior, middle, and 
anterior-superior alveolar arteries which are branches of the 
maxillary artery.
Fig. 13.5 Nerve supply of the teeth (L = lingual nerve).
Mental
Mandibular
nerve
Maxillary
nerve
Posterior
Middle
Anterior
Superior
alveolar
nerves
Infraorbital nerve
Superior
dental
plexus
Incisive
branch
Nerve to
mylohyoid
Inferior
alveolar
nerve
Ophthalmic
nerve
--- Page 200 ---
Oral Cavity
The lower teeth are supplied by the inferior alveolar 
(dental) artery, a branch of first part of maxillary artery.
N.B.
• The blood vessels and nerves enter the pulp cavity of the 
tooth through the apical foramen.
• The pulp and periodontal membrane have the same 
nerve supply but is different from that of the overlying 
gum.
Lymphatic Drainage
The lymph from teeth is usually drained into ipsilateral 
submandibular lymph nodes. Lymph from the mandibular 
incisors, however, drains into submental lymph nodes.
Sometimes the extraction of tooth may lead to 
osteomyelitis (inflammation of the bone) of the jaw. It 
usually occurs in the lower jaw and not in the upper jaw. This 
is because the lower jaw is supplied only by a single inferior 
alveolar artery. Therefore, damage of this artery at extraction 
produces bone necrosis.
The upper jaw on the other hand receives segmental 
supply by three arteries: posterior, middle, and anterior-
superior alveolar arteries. Therefore, ischemia does not 
occur following injury to an individual artery.
Clinical correlation
Types of Teeth (Fig. 13.6)
The human beings have heterodont dentition, i.e., the teeth 
vary structurally and are adapted to handle food in different 
ways. The teeth are, therefore, classified as: incisors, canines, 
premolars, and molars.
Incisors
They are four in each jaw, two on each side of the median plane. 
They are arranged in two groups: two medial incisors and 
two lateral incisors.
The four upper incisors are carried by the premaxillary 
portion of the maxilla. As the name suggests, the incisors 
cut the food by their cutting edges. They are chisel like. The 
upper and lower incisors do not meet edge to edge but by a 
sliding overlap like the blades of a pair of scissors.
Canines
There are two canines on each jaw, one on each side, lateral 
to the incisors. They are so named because they are 
prominent in dogs (carnivorous animals). The canines are 
holding and tearing teeth with conical and rugged crowns. 
They are sometimes referred to as cuspids (or eye-teeth). 
They are long teeth and usually the last deciduous teeth to 
be lost.
Premolars
There are four premolars in each jaw, two on each side. The 
premolars assist in crushing the food. They have two cusps 
and are therefore also called bicuspid teeth.
Molars
There are six molars (L. molar (es) m = grinders) in each 
jaw, three on each side. They crush and grind the food. 
They possess 3–5 tubercles, i.e., cusps on their crowns. 
Usually the upper molars have four and lower molars have 
five cusps on their crown.
Fig. 13.6 Types of the permanent teeth (upper and lower teeth of the right side).
Molars
Canine
Incisors
Premolars
--- Page 201 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
Table 13.1 Number of roots in all types of teeth
Teeth
Number of roots
• Upper molars
• Lower molars
3 roots each (2 lateral and 1 medial)
2 roots each (1 anterior and 
1 posterior)
All other teeth except first 
upper premolar*
1 root
*First upper premolar usually has a bifid root.
N.B.
• The first premolars are usually the largest teeth.
• The third molar is often known as the wisdom tooth. 
Nowadays, they may be lacking or impacted.
• The permanent molars have no deciduous predecessors.
Number of Roots in Different Types of Teeth
The different types of teeth and number of their roots are 
enumerated in Table 13.1.
The teeth can be distinguished from one another by the 
characteristics of their roots and crowns.
Clinical correlation
Dental Formula
A dental formula is a graphic representation of the types, 
number and position of teeth in the oral cavity. The humans 
being heterodont, the dental formulae for deciduous and 
permanent teeth are as follows:
Dental formula for deciduous teeth
I 2/2, C 1/1, M 2/2
= 20 teeth
I 2/2, C 1/1, M 2/2
Dental formula for permanent teeth
I 2/2, C 1/1, P 2/2, M 3/3
= 32 teeth
I 2/2, C 1/1, P 2/2, M 3/3
I = Incisor, C = Canine, P = Premolar, M = Molar
Clinical Notation System (Fig. 13.2)
In clinical practice, the dental doctors follow a definite 
system to note the various teeth. There are many systems. As 
an example, one of the systems called Zsigmondy numbering 
system is given as follows. For details of other system consult 
dental anatomy books.
Permanent teeth
They are identified by assigning a numbers from 1 to 8 
from anterior to posterior in each quadrant, viz. central 
incisor = 1, lateral incisor = 2, canine = 3, first premolar = 4, 
second premolar = 5, First molar = 6, Second molar = 7, and 
third molar = 8 (Fig. 13.7).
The quadrant symbols are as follows:
Maxillary right = ⎦
Maxillary left = ⎣
Mandibular right = ⎤
Mandibular left = ⎡
The complete set of permanent teeth in all quadrants is 
noted as follows:
Maxillary right quadrant
Maxillary left quadrant
8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
Mandibular right quadrant
Mandibular left quadrant
Deciduous (primary) teeth
They are identified by assigning letters from A to E, 
from anterior to posterior in each quadrant, viz. central 
incisor = A, lateral incisor = B, canine = C, first molar = D, 
and second molar = E.
The complete set of deciduous teeth is noted as follows:
Maxillary right quadrant
Maxillary left quadrant
E D C B A
A B C D E
E D C B A
A B C D E
Mandibular right quadrant
Mandibular left quadrant
Variations in the Number of Teeth
The variation in number of teeth is rare in deciduous teeth 
but not uncommon in permanent teeth. One or more teeth 
may fail to develop, the condition is called hypodontia.
Conversely additional or supernumerary teeth may develop 
producing a condition called hyperdontia.
y fr
Midline
Fig. 13.7 Dental terminology used for surfaces: 1 = central 
incisor; 2  =  lateral incisor; 3  =  canine; 4  =  first premolar; 
5  = second premolar; 6  =  first molar; 7  =  second molar; 
8 = third molar.
--- Page 203 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
Fig. 13.9 The fauces and its isthmus seen through the 
widely open mouth.
• The surfaces of incisors and canines that come in contact 
for cutting are called incisive surfaces.
• The surfaces of premolars and molars that come in 
contact for grinding and crushing are called occlusal 
surfaces.
Terms Used to Describe the Ridges of Teeth
Their description is beyond the scope of this book. (For 
details consult dental anatomy book.)
The central and lateral incisors and canines as a group 
are called anterior teeth whereas premolars and molars as 
a group are called posterior teeth.
Development of the Teeth (Fig. 13.8)
The teeth develop from ectoderm and an underlying layer of 
neural crest cells.
The broad stages in the development of teeth are as 
follows:
1. The oral epithelium (ectoderm) along the alveolar process 
thickens to form the dental lamina, which proliferates at 
various sites to form down growths called tooth buds
(enamel organs).
2. The enamel organs develop first for 20 deciduous teeth 
and then for permanent teeth. They give rise to ameloblasts,
which produce enamel.
3. The underlying neural crest cells proliferate to form 
dental papilla, which is covered by the bottom of 
enamel organ like a cap. This stage of development is 
called cap-stage. The dental papilla gives rise to the 
odontoblasts, which produce dentine and pulp.
4. As the dental papilla further grows, it invaginates the 
enamel organ. The surface layers of dental papilla condense 
to form dental sac, which surrounds the enamel organ. 
This stage of development is called bell stage. The dental 
sac gives rise to cementoblasts (which produce cemen-
tum) and periodontal ligaments. The rest of the neural 
crest cells form the pulp of the tooth.
Thus the tissues of tooth are derived from two embryological 
sources. These are summarized in Table 13.2.
The irregular dentition is common in children suffering from 
rickets and often associated with notching of upper 
permanent incisors.
Clinical correlation
Table 13.2 Origin of various tissues of tooth
Ectoderm
Neural crest cells
Enamel
• Dentine
• Dental pulp
• Cementum 
• Periodontal ligaments
ORAL CAVITY PROPER
BOUNDARIES
The oral cavity proper has a roof and a floor. Posteriorly the 
oral cavity communicates with the oropharynx through 
oropharyngeal isthmus (also called isthmus of fauces), which is 
bounded superiorly by the soft palate, inferiorly by the 
tongue and on each side by the palatoglossal arches. The 
approximation of these arches shuts off the mouth from 
oropharynx and is essential to deglutition (Fig. 13.9).
FLOOR OF THE MOUTH
The floor of the mouth is a small horseshoe-shaped region 
situated beneath the anterior two-third of the tongue and 
above the muscular diaphragm formed by two mylohyoid 
muscles. The surface of the floor is formed by mucus 
membrane, which connects the tongue to the mandible. 
Laterally the mucus membrane passes from the side of the 
tongue onto the mandible.
Anteriorly the mucus membrane stretches from one half 
of the mandible to the other. The anterior part of the floor is 
called sublingual region, which intervenes between the ventral 
surface of the anterior two-third of the tongue and the floor 
of the mouth.
sublingual 
region 
presents 
following 
features 
(Fig. 13.10):
1. The lower surface of the tongue is connected to the floor 
of the mouth by a median fold of the mucus membrane 
called frenulum linguae.
Palatopharyngeal
arch
Palatine
raphe
Palatoglossal
arch
Palatine
tonsil
Dorsum of
tongue
Posterior wall of
oropharynx
--- Page 204 ---
Oral Cavity
2. On each side of the lower end of frenulum, there is an 
elevation called sublingual papilla, on the summit of 
which opens the submandibular duct.
3. The sublingual gland projects up into the floor of the 
mouth and produces an elevation in the mucus mem-
brane on each side of the frenulum called sublingual
fold. Most of the sublingual ducts open on this fold.
Many structures in the oral cavity are termed by their 
relationship to the tongue, palate, cheeks, and lips (Fig. 13.10). 
The structures closest to the tongue are termed lingual, those 
closest to palate palatal, those closest to cheeks buccal, and 
those closest to lips labial.
Ludwig’s angina is a cellulitis of the floor of the mouth, 
usually due to infection from a carious molar tooth, causing 
inflammatory edema of the floor of the mouth. It spreads to 
the submandibular and submental regions producing diffuse 
swelling in these regions also. The tongue is pushed 
upwards due to edema of the floor of the mouth, resulting in 
difficulty in swallowing.
Clinical correlation
ROOF OF THE MOUTH
The roof of the mouth is formed by palate. The anterior 
two-third of palate, made up of bones is called hard palate,
while posterior one-third made of soft issue is called soft
palate. From the posterior-free margin of the soft palate a 
small conical projection called uvula hangs down in the 
median region. A poorly marked median raphe extends 
from uvula to the incisive papilla—a slight elevation behind 
the incisive fossa.
The mucus membrane in the anterior part of the hard 
plate is thrown into 3 or 4 transverse palatine folds but 
posteriorly it is comparatively smooth. The palate is 
described in detail with pharynx in Chapter 14.
TONGUE
The tongue is a mobile muscular organ in the oral cavity, which 
bulges upwards from the floor of the mouth and its posterior 
part forms the anterior wall of the oropharynx.
It is essentially a mass of skeletal muscle covered by mucus 
membrane. The muscle mass is separated into right and left 
halves by a midline fibrous septum. The tongue is separated 
from teeth by a deep alveololingual sulcus, which is filled in 
by palatoglossal fold/arch posterior to the last molar tooth.
Functions
The tongue performs the following functions:
1. Taste.
2. Speech.
3. Mastication.
4. Deglutition.
Shape
The tongue is conical in shape being elongated postero- 
anteriorly and flattened dorsoventrally.
External Features
The tongue exhibits the following external features:
1. A root.
2. A tip.
3. A body.
Root
The root of the tongue is attached to the mandible and hyoid 
bone by muscles. It is because of these attachments that the 
tongue is not swallowed during deglutition. The nerve and 
vessels of the tongue enter through its root.
It is the anterior free end of the tongue, which comes into 
contact with the central incisors.
Body
The bulk of tongue between the root and tip is called body. It 
has dorsal and ventral surfaces and right and left lateral margins.
Dorsal surface (Fig. 13.11)
The dorsal surface is convex on all the sides. It is divided by a 
V-shaped sulcus, the sulcus terminalis into two parts, viz.
1. Anterior two-third or oral part.
2. Posterior one-third or pharyngeal part.
Fig. 13.10 Sublingual region seen when the tongue is 
turned upwards. Features on inferior surface of the tongue 
also seen.
Palate
Sublingual fold
Frenulum linguae
Sublingual papilla
--- Page 205 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
The apex of the sulcus terminalis is marked by a blind 
foramen, the foramen caecum, which indicates the point of 
origin of the median thyroid diverticulum (thyroglossal duct) 
in the embryonic life.
The features differ markedly in the oral and pharyngeal 
parts.
The oral part presents the following features:
1. A median furrow, representing the bilateral origin of the 
tongue.
2. Large number of papillae.
The pharyngeal part presents the following features:
1. A large number of lymphoid follicles, which together 
constitute the lingual tonsil.
2. A large number of mucus and serous glands.
N.B. The oral and pharyngeal parts of the tongue are differ-
ent in their embryological origin for mucosa of oral two-third 
develops from the 1st and 2nd pharyngeal arches while that 
of pharyngeal part develops from the 3rd or 4th pharyngeal 
arches.
Oral part: The dorsum of oral part presents a shallow 
median furrow/groove. The mucus membrane is moist and 
pink and appears velvety due to the presence of numerous 
papillae.
The furring or coating of tongue bears no relation to digestive 
disturbances as generally thought, but is usually due to 
smoking, respiratory tract infection, fever, or oral infection.
Clinical correlation
Papillae of the tongue (Lingual papillae): They are projections 
of lamina propria (corium) of mucus membrane covered 
with epithelium (Figs 13.11 and 13.12). The following four 
chief types of papillae are found:
1. Vallate papillae: The vallate papillae (known formerly as 
circumvallate papillae) are largest (1–2 mm in diameter) 
and vary in number from 8–12 and are arranged in a 
V-shaped row in front of sulcus terminalis. Each papilla 
is like a truncated cone surrounded by a circular sulcus, 
which is bounded on its periphery by a wall or vallum.
The duct of serous glands open into the sulcus (moat) 
and taste buds are found in the papilla and its vallum.
Fig. 13.11 F eatures on the dorsal surface of the tongue.
Epiglottis
Median glossoepiglottic fold
Vallecula
Lateral glossoepiglottic fold
Lymphoid follicles
Palatine tonsil
Palatoglossal fold
Vallate papillae
Foliate papillae
Filiform papillae
Median furrow
Fungiform papillae
Sulcus terminalis
Foramen caecum
Fig. 13.12 Characteristic features of different types of 
lingual papillae: A, filiform; B, fungiform; C, vallate.
Taste buds
Taste buds
Sulcus
--- Page 206 ---
Oral Cavity
2. Filiform papillae: These are narrowest and most 
numerous. They are minute conical projections with 
sharply pointed tips. Filiform papillae are located 
abundantly on the dorsum of tongue and are largely 
responsible for its velvety appearance.
3. Fungiform papillae: They have a red rounded head 
(about 1 mm in diameter) and a narrower base, mostly 
at the apex and margins of the tongue, while some are 
scattered over the dorsum of the tongue. They are visible 
as discrete pink pinheads.
4. Foliate papillae: They consist of inconstant vertical 
grooves and ridges near the margin in front of sulcus 
terminalis. Foliate papillae are more prominent in the 
tongue of rabbits. They are rudimentary in humans.
N.B. Another type of papillae, called papillae simplex, are 
known. These are surface projections and can be seen only 
under the microscope.
Pharyngeal part: The dorsum of pharyngeal part faces 
posteriorly and forms the base of tongue.
The base of tongue constitutes the anterior wall of the 
oropharynx and can be inspected only by the use of a mirror or 
by a downward pressure on the tongue with a tongue spatula.
The mucus membrane over the dorsum of pharyngeal part 
is devoid of papillae. It, however, appears uneven due to the 
presence of numerous lymphatic follicles in the underlying 
submucosa. These follicles are collectively termed lingual
tonsil.
The mucus membrane in this part is continuous with 
mucus membrane covering the palatine tonsils and the phar-
ynx. Posteriorly, it is reflected onto the front of the epiglottis as 
the median glossoepiglottic fold and onto the lateral wall of 
pharynx as lateral glossoepiglottic folds. The space on each 
side of the median glossoepiglottic fold is termed epiglottic 
vallecula.
Ventral (inferior) surface of the tongue (Fig. 13.13)
The inferior surface of tongue is situated in the oral cavity 
only. The mucus membrane lining this surface is thin, 
smooth, and purplish. It is reflected onto the floor of the 
mouth. The under aspect of the tongue presents the following 
features:
1. Frenulum linguae, a median-fold of mucus membrane 
connecting the tongue to the floor of the mouth.
2. Deep lingual veins, may be seen through mucous 
membrane on either side of frenulum linguae (the 
lingual nerve and lingual artery are medial to the vein 
but not visible).
Plica fimbriata, a fringed fimbriated fold of mucous 
membrane lateral to the lingual vein directed forwards 
and medially towards the tip of the tongue.
• Tongue tie: If frenulum extends too far towards the tip of 
the tongue, it is called tongue tie. It inhibits normal 
movements of the tongue and may interfere with normal 
speech. This can be corrected by cutting the frenulum 
surgically.
• Certain drugs, which are lipid soluble can diffuse through 
the thin mucous membrane lining the sublingual region of 
oral cavity and can be quickly absorbed into the circulation.
A leading example is nitroglycerin (Sorbitrate), a 
vasodilator used in cases of angina pectoris. The drug 
(tablet) is placed under the tongue, where in less than 
1 minute, it dissolves and passes through the thin oral 
mucosa into the lingual veins.
• Carcinoma of the tongue: The tongue is a common site 
of carcinoma. It mostly involves lateral margins of anterior 
two-thirds of the tongue. The relative frequency of various 
sites of involvement is as follows:
– Anterior two-thirds: 64% (lateral margin, 47%; ventral 
surface and frenulum linguae, 9%; dorsum, 6.5%; tip, 
11.5%)
– Posterior one-third: 20%
– Posteriormost (faciolingual) part: 6%
Clinical correlation
Muscles of the Tongue
The musculature of tongue consists of extrinsic and intrinsic 
muscles. The intrinsic muscles are within the tongue and have 
no attachment outside the tongue whereas extrinsic muscles 
take origin from structures outside the tongue and enter the 
Fig. 13.13 Features on the ventral (inferior) surface of the 
tongue and floor of the mouth.
Plica fimbriata
Deep lingual vein
Frenulum linguae
Sublingual fold 
(overlying the 
sublingual gland)
Lower end of frenulum linguae
Sublingual papilla/caruncle
Opening of submandibular duct
Openings of ducts of
sublingual gland
--- Page 207 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
tongue to be inserted in it. The intrinsic muscles change the 
shape of tongue whereas extrinsic muscles move the tongue 
(such as protrusion, retraction and side-to-side movements) 
as well as alter its shape.
The tongue is divided into symmetrical right and left 
halves by a medial fibrous septum, which separates the mus-
cles of two sides. Each half of the tongue contains four intrin-
sic and four extrinsic muscles. These are as follows:
Intrinsic muscles
1. Superior longitudinal.
2. Inferior longitudinal.
3. Transverse.
4. Vertical.
Extrinsic muscles
1. Genioglossus.
2. Hyoglossus.
3. Styloglossus.
4. Palatoglossus.
Intrinsic muscles (Fig. 13.14): They are confined to the 
tongue and are not attached to the bone. They occupy the 
upper part of the tongue and alter its shape. The intrinsic 
muscles are arranged in several planes. They run in three 
directions: longitudinal, horizontal, and vertical. The 
complex interlacing of fibres of these muscles is responsible 
for the astonishing way in which the tongue can change its 
shape, becoming wide and flat, narrow and thick, or rolled 
up laterally to become gutter shaped. The latter shape 
cannot be achieved by a small number of people and this 
inability is genetically determined. Intrinsic muscles occupy 
the upper part of the tongue and are attached to the 
submucous fibrous layer and to the median fibrous 
septum. Their location and actions are enumerated in the 
Table 13.3.
Extrinsic muscles (Fig. 13.15): They attach the tongue to the 
mandible (genioglossus), the hyoid (hyoglossus), the styloid 
process (styloglossus), and the palate (palatoglossus) on each 
side. They are described in detail in submandibular region 
(Chapter 9). The summary of their origin, insertion, and 
actions is presented in Table 13.4.
Movements of the Tongue (Fig. 13.16)
The movements of tongue and muscles producing them are 
listed in Table 13.5.
Table 13.3 Features of the intrinsic muscles
Intrinsic 
muscle
Location
Actions
Superior 
longitudinal
Beneath the 
mucous 
membrane 
• Shortens the tongue
• Makes the dorsum 
concave
Inferior 
longitudinal
Close to inferior 
surface between 
genioglossus 
and hyoglossus
• Shortens the tongue
• Makes the dorsum convex
Transverse
Extends from 
median septum 
to the margin
Makes the tongue narrow 
and elongated
Vertical
At the border of 
the anterior part 
of the tongue
Makes the tongue broad and 
flattened
Fig. 13.14 Coronal section of the tongue showing arrangement of intrinsic and extrinsic muscles of the tongue.
Median fibrous septum
Superior longitudinal muscle
Vertical
Transverse
Inferior longitudinal 
muscle
Extrinsic
muscles
Intrinsic
muscles
Genioglossus
Styloglossus
Hyoglossus muscle
Greater cornu of hyoid bone
--- Page 208 ---
Oral Cavity
Table 13.4 Origin, insertion, and actions of the extrinsic muscles of the tongue
Muscle
Origin
Insertion
Actions
Genioglossus (a fan-
shaped muscle)
Superior genial tubercle
• Whole of the tongue (fibres radiate 
from the tip to the base)
• Hyoid bone (lowest fibres)
Protrudes the tongue when acting 
together with its counterpart of 
opposite side
Hyoglossus (a flat 
quadrilateral muscle)
Greater cornu and adjacent 
part of the body of hyoid
Side of tongue (posterior half) between 
styloglossus laterally and inferior 
longitudinal muscle medially
• Depresses the sides of the tongue
• Makes the dorsal surface convex
Styloglossus (an 
elongated slip)
Tip of styloid process and 
adjacent part of the 
stylohyoid ligament
Side of tongue (whole length), 
interdigitating posteriorly with the 
fibres of hyoglossus
Draws the side of the tongue upwards 
and backwards
Palatoglossus (a slender 
slip)
Oral surface of palatine 
aponeurosis of palate
Side of tongue (at the junction of its 
oral and pharyngeal parts)
• Pulls up the root of the tongue 
• Approximates palatoglossal arches
Fig. 13.15 Extrinsic muscles of the tongue.
Styloid process
Palate
Stylohyoid
ligament
Styloglossus
Hyoglossus
Palatoglossus
Genioglossus
Table 13.5 Movements of the tongue and muscles producing 
them
Movements of tongue
Muscles
Protrusion (most important 
movement)
Genioglossus muscles (of both 
side acting together)
Retraction
Styloglossus muscles (of both 
sides acting together)
Depression
Hyoglossus muscles (of both 
sides acting together)
Elevation (of posterior one-
third)
Palatoglossus muscles (of both 
sides acting together)
Changes in shape
Intrinsic muscles
• Safety muscle of tongue: The genioglossus is called 
safety muscle of the tongue, because two genioglossi
Clinical correlation
Fig. 13.16 Movements of the tongue: A, showing protrusion 
of the tongue; B, showing elevation, depression and 
retraction.
Depression
Elevation
Retraction
Protrusion of tongue
form the bulk of the tongue and are responsible for the 
protrusion of the tongue. If these muscles are paralyzed, 
the tongue will fall back into the oropharynx and obstruct 
the air passage causing choking and death. For the same 
reason during anesthesia, the tongue is pulled forwards to 
clear the air passage.
• The genioglossi are commonly used for clinical testing 
of the hypoglossal nerve. The muscles of both sides 
acting together protrude the tongue whereas single 
muscle deviate the tongue to the opposite side. Therefore 
when patient is asked to protrude his tongue, the tongue 
deviates to the paralyzed side (i.e., the side of lesion of 
the hypoglossal nerve; Fig. 13.17).
--- Page 209 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
N.B. The deep lingual artery anastomoses with its fellow of 
the opposite side near the tip of the tongue. It is the only 
significant anastomoses across the midline of the tongue.
Venous Drainage
It is by the following veins:
1. Deep lingual vein is the principal vein of the tongue and 
is visible on the inferior surface of the tongue near the 
median plane through thin mucous membrane in life.
2. Venae comitantes accompanying the lingual artery. They 
are joined by dorsal lingual veins.
3. Venae comitantes accompanying the hypoglossal nerve.
These veins unite at the posterior border of the hyoglossus to 
form the lingual vein, which drains into either common 
facial vein or internal jugular vein.
Lymphatic Drainage
The lymphatics emerging from the tongue are grouped into 
the following four sets (Fig. 13.19):
1. Apical vessels: They drain the tip and inferior surface of 
the tongue into submental lymph nodes after piercing the 
mylohyoid muscle. Their efferents go to the submandibular 
nodes mainly, some cross the hyoid bone to reach the 
jugulo-omohyoid nodes.
2. Marginal vessels: They drain the marginal portions of 
the anterior two-third of the tongue—unilaterally into 
submandibular lymph nodes and then to the lower deep 
cervical lymph nodes, including jugulo-omohyoid.
3. Central vessels: They drain the central portion of the 
anterior two-third of the tongue (i.e., area within 0.5 
inch on either side of midline). They pass vertically 
Fig. 13.18 Arterial supply of the tongue (FA = facial artery, 
EC = external carotid artery).
Ascending
pharyngeal
artery
Tonsillar branch of
facial artery
Dorsal lingual
arteries
Deep
lingual
artery
Sublingual
gland
Lingual
Geniohyoid
artery
Fig. 13.17 Effect of paralysis of the hypoglossal nerve (left). A. Paralysis of the genioglossus on the left side. B. Deviation of 
the tongue on the left side i.e. on the paralysed side.
Deviation of protruded
tongue to the left side
(i.e., on the side of paralysis)
Paralysed left
genioglossus
Healthy right
genioglossus
Arterial Supply (Fig. 13.18)
The tongue is supplied by the following arteries:
Branches of lingual artery (chief artery of tongue); the deep 
lingual arteries to the anterior part and dorsal lingual 
arteries to the posterior part.
2. Tonsillar branch of the facial artery.
3. Ascending pharyngeal artery.
--- Page 210 ---
Oral Cavity
downwards in the midline of the tongue between the 
genioglossus muscles and then drain bilaterally into the 
deep cervical lymph nodes.
4. Basal vessels: They drain the root of the tongue and 
posterior one-third of the tongue bilaterally into upper 
deep cervical lymph nodes, including jugulodigastric.
Prognosis of tongue cancer: There is rich anastomosis 
across the midline between the lymphatics of the posterior 
one-third of the tongue; therefore, a cancer on one side 
readily metastasizes to ipsilateral as well as the 
contralateral lymph nodes. In contrast, there is little cross 
communication of lymphatics of the anterior two-third of 
the tongue where cancer, more than 0.5 inches (12 mm) 
away from the midline, does not metastasize to the 
contralateral lymph nodes till very late stage. For this 
reason, cancer in the posterior one-third of the tongue has 
poor prognosis.
Clinical correlation
Nerve Supply (Fig. 13.20)
The nerves supplying the tongue are as follows:
Motor supply: All the muscles of tongue (intrinsic and 
extrinsic) are supplied by the hypoglossal nerve except
palatoglossus which is supplied by cranial root of accessory 
via pharyngeal plexus.
Sensory supply: Anterior two-third of the tongue is supplied 
(a) lingual nerve carrying general sensations, and
(b) chorda tympani nerve carrying special sensations of 
taste.
Posterior one-third of the tongue is supplied by:
(a) glossopharyngeal nerve, carrying both general and 
special sensations of taste, and
(b) posteriormost part (base of the tongue), supplied by the 
internal laryngeal branch of the superior laryngeal carrying 
special sensations of taste.
Fig. 13.19 Lymphatic drainage of the tongue: A, showing course and direction of apical, marginal, and basal lymph vessels; 
B, showing course and direction of central lymph vessels. Figure in the inset shows areas (in red) having bilateral lymphatic 
drainage.
Basal vessels
Digastric (posterior belly)
Marginal vessels
Apical vessels
Submental nodes
Submandibular nodes
Omohyoid (superior belly)
Central vessels
Deep cervical lymph nodes
Dorsal
submucous plexus
Genioglossus
Styloglossus
xxxx
x x x
x x x
x x x
x x x
x x x
x x x
x x x
x x x
x x x
x x x
Root and posterior
one-third of tongue
Central portion of tongue
within half an inch on
either side of midline
Inset
Tip of tongue
Jugulodigastric node
Jugulo-omohyoid node
Deep cervical nodes
--- Page 211 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
Fig. 13.22 Development of the tongue: A, appearance of 
four swellings in the floor of primitive pharynx; B, showing 
formation of anterior two-third by the growth and fusion of 
two lingual swellings and posterior one-third by the growth 
and fusion of cranial part of the hypobranchial eminence.
N.B. Nerves carrying taste sensations from the tongue are 
as follows (Fig. 13.21):
• Chorda tympani nerve (a branch of the facial nerve) from 
anterior two-third of the tongue.
• Glossopharyngeal from posterior one-third of the tongue.
• Internal laryngeal nerve from superior laryngeal branch of 
the vagus nerve, from posteriormost part of the tongue.
Referred pain of cancer tongue: The patients with cancer 
tongue often complains of pain in ear, temporomandibular 
joint, temporal fossa, and/or lower teeth.
This is due to referred pain. It is important to note that 
pain is frequently referred from one branch of the mandibular 
nerve to the other. Carcinoma commonly involves anterior 
2/3rd of tongue. Thus if the sensations carried from anterior 
2/3rd of the tongue by the lingual nerve are referred to 
auriculotemporal nerve, the patient feels pain in the ear, 
TMJ, and temporal fossa. On the other hand, if the pain 
from lingual nerve is referred to the inferior alveolar nerve, 
the pain is felt in the lower teeth.
Clinical correlation
Development of the Tongue (Fig. 13.22)
The tongue develops from the floor of the primitive pharynx 
in relation to the pharyngeal arches.
Fig. 13.20 Nerve supply of the tongue. Right half of the 
figure shows motor supply and left half shows sensory 
supply.
Sensory supply
Internal laryngeal nerve
(general and special sensory)
Glossopharyngeal nerve
(general and special sensory)
Lingual nerve
(general sensory)
Chorda tympani
(special sensory)
All muscles of
tongue except
palatoglossus
(hypoglossal
nerve)
Motor supply
Palatoglossus
(cranial root of
accessory via
vagus nerve)
Fig. 13.21 Nerves carrying taste sensations from the 
tongue.
Nucleus
tractus
solitarius
Chorda tympani nerve
(branch of facial nerve)
Glossopharyngeal nerve
Internal
laryngeal nerve
(branch of
vagus nerve)
Lingual swellings
Tuberculum
impar
Hypobranchial
eminence
(Copula of His)
Lingual swellings
Anterior two-third of 
tongue
Cranial part
Hypobranchial eminence
Caudal part
Cranial part of
hypobranchial eminence
Posterior one-third of
tongue
Caudal part of
hypobranchial eminence
Posteriormost part of
tongue
Sulcus terminalis
Foramen caecum
--- Page 212 ---
Oral Cavity
Development of Mucous Membrane of the Tongue
The mucous membrane of the anterior two-third of tongue 
develops from the fusion of a pair of lingual swellings with 
the tuberculum impar. The lingual swellings appear as 
endodermal thickenings at the anterior ends of the first 
pharyngeal arches. The tuberculum impar appears as a 
median swelling just behind the lingual swellings between 
the 1st and 2nd pharyngeal arches. The tuberculum impar 
soon disappears; thus the oral part is mostly bilateral in 
origin.
The lingual swellings fuse in the midline forming a 
median sulcus. The mucous membrane of posterior one-
third of the tongue develops from the cranial part of 
hypobranchial eminence. The hypobranchial eminence 
(copula of His) appears as a median swelling due to 
thickening of endoderm connecting the ventral ends of 2nd, 
3rd, and 4th pharyngeal arches. It soon divides into two 
parts: a cranial part related to the 2nd and 3rd arches and a 
caudal part related to the 4th arch.
The 3rd arch endoderm grows forwards over the 2nd 
arch to fuse with the lingual swellings and tuberculum 
impar and gives rise to the mucous membrane of the 
posterior one-third of the tongue. The 3rd arch grows 
forwards in a V-shaped manner and fuses with the anterior 
two-third of the tongue. The line of fusion is indicated by 
sulcus terminalis.
The mucous membrane of the posteriormost part of the 
tongue is derived from the 4th pharyngeal pouch.
The foramen caecum represents the site of development 
of thyroglossal duct forming thyroid gland in the embryo.
Development of Muscles of the Tongue
The muscles of tongue develop from occipital myotomes,
which at first are closely related to developing hindbrain 
and later migrates anteroinferiorly around the pharynx and 
enter the tongue. The migrating myotomes carry with them 
their nerve supply—the 12th cranial nerve.
Correlation of Nerve Supply of the 
Tongue with its Development
Motor innervation: Muscles of the tongue are supplied by 
the hypoglossal nerve because they develop from occipital 
myotomes (occipital myotomes are formed by the fusion of 
precervical somites).
Sensory innervation:
1. Anterior two-third develops from the 1st pharyngeal 
arch, and therefore, supplied by:
(a) lingual nerve, the post-trematic nerve of the 1st 
arch, and
chorda tympani nerve, the pre-trematic nerve of the 
1st arch.
2. Posterior one-third develops from the 3rd pharyngeal 
arch, hence supplied by the glossopharyngeal nerve, the 
nerve of the 3rd arch.
Posteriormost part develops from the 4th arch, hence 
supplied by the internal laryngeal nerve, the nerve of 
the 4th arch.
The correlation between nerve supply of the tongue with its 
development is also presented in Table 13.6.
Table 13.6 Correlation of nerve supply of the tongue with its development
Structures
Source of development
Nerve supply
Muscles
Occipital myotomes
Hypoglossal nerve
Mucous membrane
(a) Anterior two-third of tongue
First arch
• Lingual nerve (post-trematic nerve of 1st arch)
• Chorda tympani nerve (pre-trematic nerve of 1st arch)
(a) Posterior one-third of tongue
Third arch
Glossopharyngeal nerve (nerve of 3rd arch)
(c) Posteriormost part of tongue
Fourth arch
Internal laryngeal nerve (nerve of 4th arch)
--- Page 213 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
Golden Facts to Remember
  Hardest substance/structure in the body
Enamel of the tooth
  Most sensitive part of the tooth
Dentine
  Wisdom tooth
Third molar
  Eye tooth
Upper canine
  First deciduous teeth to erupt
Mandibular central incisors (6 months)
  First permanent teeth to erupt
First mandibular molars (6 years)
  Last permanent teeth to erupt
Third molars
  Last deciduous teeth to fall
Canines
  Most commonly impacted teeth
Mandibular third molars
  Safety muscles of the tongue
Genioglossus
  Most common site of cancer tongue
Lateral margin of anterior two-third of tongue
  Principal lymph node of the tongue (lymph node 
of the tongue)
Jugulo-omohyoid
A 67-year-old chronic tobacco chewer complained to 
his family physician about a sore on the side of his 
tongue for 6 months. He stated that he first thought that 
it was a simple sore and then he became worried because 
it now enlarged in size and looked different. On 
examination the physician found an ulcerated and 
indurated (L. indurare = to harden) lesion on the lateral 
margin of the patient’s tongue. The palpation of lymph 
nodes in the region of the neck revealed enlarged hard 
submandibular and lower deep cervical lymph nodes. He 
was referred to an ENT surgeon, who advised biopsy. 
The biopsy report revealed squamous cell carcinoma.
Questions
1. What is the commonest site of cancer of tongue?
2. What is lymphatic drainage of the side of anterior 
two-third of tongue?
3. In which location does cancer of tongue have poor 
prognosis and why?
4. Which lymph node is called lymph node of the 
tongue?
5. What is most common cause of fatal hemorrhage 
in tongue cancer?
Answers
1. Lateral margin of the anterior two-third of tongue.
2. Lymph from side of anterior two-third of tongue 
is drained into submandibular and lower deep 
cervical lymph nodes.
3. Posterior one-third of tongue because of bilateral 
spread of cancer. (Note that lymph from posterior 
one-third of tongue is drained bilaterally.)
4. Jugulo-omohyoid lymph node.
5. Erosion of deep lingual artery.
Clinical Case Study
--- Page 214 ---
Pharynx and Palate
CHAPTER
PHARYNX
The pharynx is a funnel-shaped fibromuscular tube, 
extending from the base of the skull to the esophagus 
(Fig. 14.1). It is lined throughout with mucous membrane. 
The pharynx acts as a common channel (Fig. 14.2) for both 
food (deglutition) and air (respiration).
MEASUREMENTS
Length: 12–14 cm,
Width: 3.5 cm at its base, and
 
1.5 cm at pharyngoesophageal junction.
LOCATION
It is situated behind the cavities of nose, mouth, and the 
larynx with which it communicates (Fig. 14.1).
BOUNDARIES AND RELATIONS
Superior: Base of skull including the posterior part of the 
body of sphenoid and basilar part of occipital 
bone in front of pharyngeal tubercle.
Inferior: 
 Continuous with the esophagus at the level of 
lower border of cricoid cartilage anteriorly and 
lower border of C6 vertebra posteriorly.
Posterior: Prevertebral fascia in front of cervical spine. The 
pharynx is separated from prevertebral fascia 
only by a layer of loose areolar tissue, which 
allows the pharynx to slide freely on this fascia 
during swallowing.
Anterior: Opens into nasal cavities, mouth, and larynx.
Lateral: 
 Neurovascular bundle of neck and styloid process 
with its attached muscles and ligaments.
SUBDIVISIONS (Figs 14.2–14.4)
The pharynx is divided into three parts. From above 
downwards these are as follows:
1. Nasopharynx, lying behind the nose.
2. Oropharynx, lying behind the oral cavity.
3. Laryngopharynx, lying behind the larynx.
NASOPHARYNX
The nasopharynx lies behind the nasal cavities and above the 
soft palate.
Boundaries
Roof: It is formed by:
(a) Body of sphenoid.
(b) Basilar part of the occipital bone.
Fig. 14.1 The sagittal section through the nose, mouth, 
pharynx, and larynx.
Tubal tonsil
Body of sphenoid
Nasopharyngeal bursa
Pharyngeal tonsil
Pharyngeal recess
Anterior arch of atlas
Basilar part of
occipital bone
Passavant’s ridge
Laryngeal inlet
Arytenoid cartilage
Cricoid cartilage
(lamina)
Cricoid cartilage
(anterior arch)
Thyroid cartilage
Laryngeal cavity
Nasal cavity
Oral cavity
Hyoid bone
Palatopharyngeal fold
Tonsil
Palatoglossal fold
Epiglottis
Tubal opening
Rathke’s pouch
--- Page 215 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
Fig. 14.4 The pharynx opened from behind showing features in the anterior walls of the nasopharynx, oropharynx, and 
laryngopharynx.
Choanae with
nasal conchae
Tubal elevation
Opening of
auditory tube
Soft palate
Base of tongue
Oropharynx
Laryngeal inlet
Piriform fossa
Laryngopharynx
Uvula
Cavity of mouth
Nasal septum (posterior edge)
Nasopharynx
Palatine tonsil
Post-cricoid area
Epiglottis
Aryepiglottic fold
Interarytenoid fold
Fig. 14.2 Pathways for food (red arrow) and air (green 
arrow) through the pharynx.
Food
Nasopharynx
Pharyngeal/
nasopharyngeal
isthmus
Oropharynx
Laryngopharynx
Lower border of
cricoid (C6)
Esophagus
Trachea
Laryngeal cavity
Oropharyngeal
isthmus
Oral cavity
Nasal cavity
Choanae (posterior nasal apertures)
Nasal cavity
Hard palate
Oral cavity
Nasopharynx
Soft palate
Oropharynx
Laryngopharynx
Cricoid cartilage
Laryngeal cavity
Fig. 14.3 Subdivisions of the pharynx.
Floor: It is formed by:
(a) Soft palate (sloping upper surface).
(b) Pharyngeal isthmus, an opening in the floor between 
the free edges of soft palate and posterior pharyngeal 
wall.
Anterior wall: It is formed by posterior nasal apertures 
separated by the posterior edge of nasal septum.
Posterior wall: It forms continuous sloping surface with roof. 
It is supported by anterior arch of C1 vertebra.
Lateral wall: Medial pterygoid plate of sphenoid.
Features
The features seen in the nasopharynx are:
(a) Nasopharyngeal (pharyngeal) tonsil: It is a collection 
of lymphoid tissue beneath the mucous membrane at
--- Page 216 ---
Pharynx and Palate
the junction of the roof and posterior wall of the 
nasopharynx.
A mucous diverticulum called nasopharyngeal 
bursa (pouch of Luschka) extends upwards into the 
substance of nasopharyngeal tonsil from its apex. It is 
provided with mucous glands. This bursa develops 
due to adhesion of notochord to the dorsal wall of the 
pharyngeal part of the foregut. Sometimes a small 
dimple is seen in the mucous membrane above the 
pharyngeal tonsil. It represents the remains of 
Rathke’s pouch. A craniopharyngioma may arise from 
(b) Orifice of the pharyngotympanic tube or auditory 
tube (eustachian tube): This lies on the lateral wall at 
the level of the inferior nasal concha and 1.25 cm behind 
The upper and posterior margins of this opening are 
bounded by a tubal elevation, which is produced by the 
collection of lymphoid tissue called tubal tonsil. Two 
mucous folds extend from this elevation:
(i) Salpingopharyngeal 
fold 
extends 
vertically 
downwards and fades on the side wall of the 
pharynx. It contains salpingopharyngeus muscle.
(ii) Salpingopalatine fold extends downwards and 
forwards to the soft palate. It contains the levator 
palati muscle.
(c) Pharyngeal recess: It is a deep depression behind the 
tubal elevation; it is called pharyngeal recess (fossa of 
Rosenmüller).
N.B. Structurally 
functionally 
nasopharynx 
resembles the nose. It is respiratory in function and lined by 
pseudostratified ciliated columnar epithelium. Its walls are 
rigid and non-collapsible to keep the air passage patent.
Adenoids: The nasopharyngeal tonsils are prominent in 
children up to the 6 years of age, then gradually undergo 
atrophy till puberty and almost completely disappear by the 
age of 20.
The nasopharyngeal tonsils when enlarge due to infection 
are known as adenoids, which block the posterior nares 
making ‘mouth breathing obligatory’.
The affected children present the following clinical 
features:
• Nasal obstruction
• Nasal discharge
• Mouth breathing with protrusion of tongue
• Toneless voice (due to absence of nasal tone)
• Small nose
• Epistaxis (i.e., nose-bleeding).
The infection from pharynx can easily pass into middle ear 
through pharyngotympanic tube.
Clinical correlation
Nasopharyngeal Isthmus and Passavant’s Ridge
Some fibres of the palatopharyngeus muscle (arising from 
palatine aponeurosis) sweep horizontally backwards and 
join the upper fibres of the superior constrictor muscle to 
form a U-shaped muscle-loop in the posterior pharyngeal 
wall underneath the mucosa, which is pulled forward during 
swallowing to form the Passavant ridge. During swallowing 
the pharyngeal isthmus (the opening between the free edges 
of soft palate and posterior wall) is closed by the elevation of 
the soft palate and pulling forward of posterior pharyngeal 
wall (Passavant ridge). This U-shaped muscle loop thus acts 
as a palatopharyngeal sphincter.
OROPHARYNX (Figs 14.1, 14.2, and 14.3)
It lies behind the oral cavity and extends from the lower 
surface of the soft palate above to the upper border of 
epiglottis below.
Boundaries
Roof: It is formed by:
(a) Soft palate (under surface).
(b) Pharyngeal isthmus through which it communicated 
with the nasopharynx.
Floor: It is formed by:
(a) Posterior 1/3rd of the tongue.
(b) Interval between the tongue and epiglottis.
Anterior wall: It is incomplete and formed by:
(a) Oropharyngeal isthmus (through which it opens into 
the oral cavity).
(b) Pharyngeal part of the tongue.
Posterior wall: It is formed by body of C2 vertebra and upper 
part of the body of C3 vertebra.
Lateral wall: On each side, it is supported by pterygo-
mandibular raphe, mandible, tongue, and hyoid bone.
The oropharynx provides common path for the food and 
air.
Features
The features seen in the oropharynx are:
(a) Lateral wall presents palatine tonsils, one on either side. 
It is located into a triangular fossa (tonsillar fossa) 
bounded anteriorly by palatoglossal arch and posteriorly 
by palatopharyngeal arch. 
The palatoglossal arch runs downwards and forwards 
from palate to the lateral margin of the tongue. The 
palatopharyngeal arch runs downwards and backwards 
to the pharyngeal wall where it fades out (for details of 
palatine tonsil, see page 208).
--- Page 217 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
(b) Anterior wall presents:
 
(i) Lingual tonsil, formed by numerous nodules of 
lymphoid tissue underneath the mucous lining of 
the pharyngeal part of the dorsum of the tongue.
 
(ii) Upper free end of epiglottis, behind the tongue.
 
(iii) Median and lateral glossoepiglottic folds, connecting 
the anterior surface and edges of the epiglottis, 
respectively to the tongue.
 
(iv) Epiglottic valleculae are shallow fossae between the 
median and lateral glossoepiglottic folds.
Oropharyngeal Isthmus (Fig. 14.5)
It is an arched opening between the two palatoglossal folds 
through which the oral cavity communicates with the 
oropharynx. Its boundaries are as under:
Above: 
Soft palate.
Below: 
 Dorsal surface of the posterior one-third of the 
tongue.
Lateral: Palatoglossal fold/arch on either side containing 
palatoglossus muscle.
The oropharyngeal isthmus is closed during deglutition to 
prevent regurgitation of food from the pharynx to the 
mouth.
Since the pathways for food and air cross each other in the 
oropharynx, the food sometimes may enter into the 
respiratory tract and cause choking. Similarly the air often 
enters the digestive tract producing gas in the stomach, 
which results in eructation (belching).
Clinical correlation
LARYNGOPHARYNX
The laryngopharynx lies behind the laryngeal inlet and 
posterior wall of the larynx. It lies behind the larynx and 
extends from the upper border of the epiglottis to the lower 
border of cricoid cartilage anteriorly and lower border of C6 
vertebra posteriorly. It communicates anteriorly with the 
laryngeal cavity through laryngeal inlet and inferiorly with 
the esophagus at the pharyngoesophageal junction (the 
narrowest part of the GIT except appendix).
Boundaries
Anterior wall: It is formed by:
(a) Laryngeal inlet.
(b) Posterior surface of the larynx.
Posterior wall: It is supported by the bodies of C3, C4, C5, 
and C6 vertebrae.
Lateral wall: It is supported by thyroid cartilage and 
thyrohyoid membrane.
Features
The features seen in the laryngopharynx are:
(a) Anterior wall presents laryngeal inlet and below the 
inlet it is supported by cricoid and arytenoid cartilages.
(b) Lateral wall presents piriform fossa one on each side of 
laryngeal inlet. The piriform fossa is described in detail 
below.
PIRIFORM FOSSA
It is a deep recess broad above and narrow below in the 
anterior part of lateral wall of the laryngopharynx, on each 
side of the laryngeal inlet. These recesses are produced due to 
bulging of larynx into laryngopharynx.
Boundaries (Fig. 14.6)
Medial: Aryepiglottic fold and quadrangular membrane of 
larynx.
Lateral: Mucous membrane covering the medial surface of 
the lamina of thyroid cartilage and thyrohyoid 
membrane.
The internal laryngeal nerve and superior 
laryngeal vessels pierce the thyrohyoid membrane 
and traverse underneath the mucous membrane of 
the floor of the fossa to reach the medial wall.
Above: 
 Piriform fossa is separated from epiglottic vallecula 
by lateral glossoepiglottic fold.
N.B.
• The piriform fossa is deep in ruminating animals in which 
it acts as lateral food channel to convey the bolus of food 
during deglutition by the side of closed laryngeal inlet. 
Fig. 14.5 Boundaries of the oropharyngeal isthmus.
Dorsal surface
of the posterior
one-third of
the tongue
Soft palate
Oropharyngeal
isthmus
Palatoglossal
arch
Lingual tonsil
Palatine tonsil
Palatopharyngeal
arch
--- Page 218 ---
Pharynx and Palate
• It is sometimes, artificially deepened by smugglers using 
lead balls to hide precious materials such as diamonds. 
For this reason, the piriform fossa is also called smuggler’s 
fossa.
• The piriform fossae are dangerous sites for perforation by 
an endoscope.
• A malignant tumor of the laryngopharynx (hypopharynx) 
may grow in the space provided by the piriform fossa 
without producing symptoms until the patient presents 
with metastatic lymphadenopathy.
• The ingested foreign bodies (for example, fish bones, 
safety pins) are sometimes lodged into the piriform fossa. 
If care is not taken, the removal of foreign bodies may 
damage the internal laryngeal nerve leading to anesthesia 
in the supraglottic part of the larynx and subsequent loss 
of protective cough refl ex.
Clinical correlation
PHARYNGEAL WALL (Fig. 14.7)
The wall of the pharynx consists of four layers; from within 
outwards these are as follows:
1. Mucous membrane/mucous coat.
2. Pharyngobasilar fascia (pharyngeal aponeurosis).
3. Muscular coat (pharyngeal muscles).
4. Buccopharyngeal fascia (loose areolar sheath).
Mucous membrane/mucous coat: The mucous membrane 
lining the pharynx contains a considerable amount of 
elastic tissue and is continuous with the mucous lining of 
eustachian tubes, nasal cavities, mouth, larynx, and 
esophagus. It is lined by non-keratinized stratified 
squamous epithelium except in the region of the 
nasopharynx, where it is lined by ciliated columnar 
epithelium (respiratory epithelium).
N.B. There are many subendothelial collections of lymphoid 
tissue around the commencement of food and air passages, 
into which epithelium tends to invaginate in the form of 
narrow clefts (crypts).
These collections of lymphoid tissue form pharyngeal 
and tubal tonsils in the nasopharynx and palatine, and 
lingual tonsils in the oropharynx.
Pharyngobasilar fascia: It is a fibrous thickening of the 
submucosa. It lines the muscular coat and is thick near the 
base of the skull but thin and indistinct inferiorly. The 
pharyngobasilar fascia is thickest:
(a) in the upper part where it fills the gap between the upper 
border of superior constrictor and the base of the skull, 
(b) posteriorly where it forms the pharyngeal raphe.
Muscular coat: The muscular coat consists of the following 
two layers of striated muscles:
(a) The outer layer comprises three pairs of circular muscles 
called constrictors.
(b) The inner layer comprises three pairs of longitudinal 
muscles.
The pharyngeal muscles are described in detail under the 
heading ‘muscles of the pharynx’.
Fig. 14.6 Schematic coronal section through larynx showing 
the location and boundaries of the piriform fossa.
Epiglottis
Saccule of larynx
Sinus of larynx
Piriform fossa
Hyoid bone
Aryepiglottic fold
Thyrohyoid
membrane
Internal
laryngeal nerve
Lamina of
thyroid cartilage
Cricoid cartilage
Fig. 14.7 Structure of the pharyngeal wall.
Mucous membrane
Pharyngobasilar fascia
Superior
Middle
Inferior
Buccopharyngeal
fascia
Constrictors
Pharyngotympanic
tube
Base of skull
--- Page 219 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
Buccopharyngeal fascia: It is an inconspicuous fascia, 
which covers the outer surface of constrictor muscles. 
In the upper part, it is also prolonged forwards to cover the 
buccinator muscles, hence the name buccopharyngeal fascia.
Above the upper border of the superior constrictor, it 
blends with the pharyngobasilar fascia.
Waldeyer’s ring: The aggregations of lymphoid tissue 
underneath the epithelial lining of pharyngeal wall called 
tonsils, surround the commencement of air and food 
passages. These aggregations together constitute an 
interrupted circle called Waldeyer’s ring, which forms the 
special feature of the interior of the pharynx.
Clinical correlation
The Waldeyer’s ring is formed by (Fig. 14.8):
1. Pharyngeal tonsil (nasopharyngeal tonsil), postero-
superiorly.
2. Lingual tonsil, anteriorly.
3. Tubal and palatine tonsils, laterally.
It is thought that, Waldeyer’s ring prevents the invasion of 
microorganisms from entering the air and food passages 
and this helps in the defense mechanism of the respiratory 
and alimentary systems.
MUSCLES OF THE PHARYNX
CONSTRICTOR MUSCLES (Figs 14.9 and 14.10)
The three constrictor muscles of the pharynx (superior, middle, 
and inferior) are arranged like a flowerpot without base, 
placed one above the other and open in front for 
communication with the nasal, oral, and laryngeal cavities. 
Thus inferior constrictor overlaps the middle, which in turn 
overlaps the superior constrictor (Fig. 14.9 inset).
The constrictor muscles form bulk of the muscular coat of 
the pharyngeal wall. They arise in front from the margins of 
posterior openings of the nasal, oral, and laryngeal cavities. 
The fibres pass backwards, in a fan-shaped manner into the 
lateral and posterior walls of the pharynx to be inserted into 
the median fibrous raphe on the posterior aspect of the 
pharynx, extending from the base of the skull (pharyngeal 
tubercle of occipital bone) to the esophagus. The origin and 
insertion of constrictions of the pharynx is shown in 
Figure 14.10.
Fig. 14.8 Waldeyer’s ring (an interrupted ‘circle of tonsils’ at 
the upper end of the respiratory and alimentary tracts).
Pharyngeal tonsil
Tubal tonsil
Tubal
opening
Palatine tonsil
Lingual tonsil
Base of
skull
Lower border of
cricoid cartilage
Mucous lining of pharynx
Sinus of Morgagni
Superior
Middle
Inferior
Vertical extent of pharynx
Constrictors
Fig. 14.9 Overlapping arrangement of the constrictor muscles of the pharynx. The figure in the inset shows flowerpot 
arrangeme nt of the constrictors (SC = superior constrictor, MC = middle constrictor, IC = inferior constrictor).
--- Page 220 ---
Pharynx and Palate
The origin, insertion, nerve supply, and actions of the 
constrictor muscles are presented in Table 14.1.
Pharyngeal Pouch (also called Zenker’s diverticulum): 
Inferior constrictor muscle has two parts: thyropharyngeus 
made up of oblique fibres and cricopharyngeus made up of 
transverse fibres.
potential 
posteriorly 
between 
thyropharyngeus and cricopharyngeus is called pharyngeal 
dimple or Killian’s dehiscence (Fig. 14.11). The mucosa and 
submucosa of the pharynx may bulge through this weak 
area to form a pharyngeal pouch or diverticulum (Fig. 14.12).
The formation of pharyngeal pouch in the region of 
Killian’s dehiscence is attributed to the neuromuscular 
incoordination in this region, which may be because the two 
parts of the inferior constrictor have different nerve supply. 
The propulsive thyropharyngeus is supplied by the 
pharyngeal plexus and the sphincteric cricopharyngeus is 
supplied by the recurrent laryngeal nerve. If the 
cricopharyngeus fails to relax when the thyropharyngeus 
contracts, the bolus of food is pushed backwards and tends 
to produce a diverticulum.
Clinical correlation
Gaps in the Pharyngeal Wall
The four gaps exist on either side in the pharyngeal wall in 
relation to constrictor muscles. The gaps and structures 
Fig. 14.10 Origin and insertion of the constrictors of the 
pharynx.
Pharyngobasilar
fascia
Auditory tube
Levator palati
Ascending
palatine artery
Tensor palati
Superior
constrictor
Stylopharyngeus
Internal laryngeal
nerve
External laryngeal
nerve
Cricothyroid
Superior
laryngeal nerve
Recurrent laryngeal
nerve
Esophagus
Median
pharyngeal
raphe
Thyropharyngeus
Inferior constrictor
Cricopharyngeus
Glossopharyngeal
nerve
Middle
constrictor
Table 14.1 Origin, insertion, nerve supply, and actions of the constrictor muscles of the pharynx
Muscle
Origin
Insertion
Nerve supply
Action
Superior constrictor 
(Quadrilateral in shape)
(a) Pterygoid hamulus 
(b) Pterygomandibular raphe 
(c) Medial surface of the 
mandible at the upper 
end of mylohyoid line
(d) Side of the posterior part 
of the tongue
(a) Pharyngeal tubercle 
on the base of skull 
(b) Median fibrous 
raphe
Pharyngeal branch of the 
vagus nerve carrying fibres 
of cranial root of the 
accessory nerve
Helps in 
deglutition
Middle constrictor 
(Fan shaped)
(a) Lower part of the 
stylohyoid ligament 
(b) Lesser cornu of hyoid 
(c) Upper border of greater 
cornu of hyoid
Median fibrous raphe
Pharyngeal branch of the 
vagus nerve carrying fibres 
of cranial root of the 
accessory nerve
Helps in 
deglutition
Inferior constrictor 
(a) Thyropharyngeus
(a) Oblique line on lamina of 
the thyroid cartilage 
(b) Tendinous band between 
the thyroid (inferior) 
tubercle and cricoid 
cartilage
Median fibrous raphe
(a) Pharyngeal plexus and 
(b) External laryngeal 
nerve
Helps in 
deglutition
(b) Cricopharyngeus
Cricoid cartilage
Median fibrous raphe
Recurrent laryngeal nerve
--- Page 221 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
passing through these gaps (Fig. 14.13) are presented in 
Table 14.2.
LONGITUDINAL MUSCLES (Fig. 14.14)
These muscles run longitudinally from above downwards to 
form the longitudinal muscle coat (Table 14.3). The origin, 
Fig. 14.11 Killian’s dehiscence.
Thyropharyngeus
Killian’s dehiscence
Cricopharyngeus
Fig. 14.12 Pharyngeal diverticulum.
Thyropharyngeus
Killian’s
dehiscence
Pharyngeal pouch
(Zenker’s diverticulum)
Cricopharyngeus
Trachea
Esophagus
Fig. 14.13 Structures passing through the gaps in the pharyngeal wall.
Pharyngotympanic tube
Levator palati muscle
Ascending palatine artery
Stylopharyngeus muscle
Glossopharyngeal nerve
Internal laryngeal nerve
Recurrent laryngeal nerve
Inferior laryngeal artery
Base of skull
Superior constrictor
Middle constrictor
Inferior constrictor
Superior laryngeal artery
Table 14.2 The gaps in the pharyngeal wall and structures 
passing through them
Structures passing 
through them
Between the base of skull and 
the upper concave border of 
superior constrictor (sinus of 
Morgagni)
• Auditory tube
• Levator palati muscle
• Ascending palatine artery
• Palatine branch of the 
ascending pharyngeal artery
Between the superior and 
middle constrictors
• Stylopharyngeus muscle
• Glossopharyngeal nerve
Between the middle and 
inferior constrictors
• Internal laryngeal nerve
• Superior laryngeal vessels
Between the lower border of 
inferior constrictor and the 
esophagus (in the tracheo-
esophageal groove)
• Recurrent laryngeal nerve
• Inferior laryngeal vessels
--- Page 222 ---
Pharynx and Palate
pharyngeal plexus), except the stylopharyngeus which is 
supplied by the glossopharyngeal nerve.
Sensory:
1. Nasopharynx, by pharyngeal branch of the pterygo-
palatine ganglion carrying fibres from maxillary division 
of the trigeminal nerve.
2. Oropharynx, by glossopharyngeal nerve.
3. Laryngopharynx, by the internal laryngeal nerve.
PHARYNGEAL PLEXUS OF THE NERVES
It lies on the posterolateral aspect of the pharynx over the 
middle constrictor underneath the buccopharyngeal fascia.
It is formed by:
1. Pharyngeal branch of the vagus nerve carrying fibres 
from cranial part of the accessory nerve.
2. Pharyngeal branch of the glossopharyngeal nerve.
3. Pharyngeal branch from superior cervical sympathetic 
ganglion.
ARTERIAL SUPPLY OF THE PHARYNX
The branches of the following arteries supply the pharynx:
1. Ascending pharyngeal artery (from external carotid 
artery).
2. Ascending palatine and tonsillar artery (from facial 
artery).
3. Greater palatine and pharyngeal artery (from maxillary 
artery).
4. Lingual artery (from external carotid artery).
VENOUS DRAINAGE OF THE PHARYNX
The venous blood from pharynx is largely drained into 
pharyngeal venous plexus, which, like the pharyngeal nerve 
plexus, is situated on the posterolateral aspect of the pharynx 
over the middle constrictor. It drains into the internal jugular 
vein.
Fig. 14.14 Origin and insertion of the longitudinal muscles 
of the pharynx (SC  =  superior constrictor, MC  =  middle 
constrictor, IC = inferior constrictor).
Epiglottis
Posterior border of
lamina of thyroid cartilage
Palatopharyngeus
Styloid process
Salpingopharyngeus
Stylopharyngeus
Auditory tube
Palate
Table 14.3 Origin, insertion, and nerve supply of the longitudinal muscles of the pharynx
Muscle
Origin
Insertion
Nerve supply
Stylopharyngeus
Medial surface of the base of 
styloid process
Posterior border of the lamina of 
thyroid cartilage
Glossopharyngeal (IX) nerve
Palatopharyngeus
By two fasciculi (anterior and 
posterior) from the upper surface 
of the palatine aponeurosis
Posterior border of the lamina of 
thyroid cartilage
Cranial root of 11th cranial nerve by 
pharyngeal plexus
Salpingopharyngeus
Lower part of the cartilage of the 
auditory tube
Posterior border of the lamina of 
thyroid cartilage
Cranial root of 11th cranial nerve by 
pharyngeal plexus
insertion, and nerve supply of the longitudinal muscles are 
presented in Table 14.3.
Actions of the Longitudinal Muscles
They elevate the larynx and shorten the pharynx during 
swallowing. At the same time palatopharyngeal sphincter 
formed by some fibres of the palatophayngeus muscle closes 
the nasopharyngeal isthmus.
NERVE SUPPLY OF THE PHARYNX
Motor: All the pharyngeal muscles are supplied by the cranial 
root of accessory nerve (via pharyngeal branch of vagus and
--- Page 223 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
Fig. 14.15 Horizontal section through tonsillar fossa showing medial and lateral surfaces of the tonsil and tonsillar bed.
Superior constrictor
Tonsillar bed
Buccopharyngeal fascia
Styloglossus
Pharyngobasilar fascia
Paratonsillar vein
Palatopharyngeus muscle
Palatopharyngeal arch
Intratonsillar cleft
Tonsillar crypts
Palatoglossal arch
Glossopharyngeal nerve
Peritonsillar space
Palatoglossus muscle
LYMPHATIC DRAINAGE OF THE PHARYNX
The lymph from pharynx is drained into the upper and 
lower deep cervical lymph nodes directly and through 
retropharyngeal lymph nodes.
DEGLUTITION (SWALLOWING)
The deglutition is a process or act by which the food is 
transferred from the mouth to the stomach. It consists of the 
following three successive stages/phases:
1. First stage (in the mouth) – voluntary
2. Second stage (in the pharynx) – involuntary
3. Third stage (in the esophagus) – involuntary
First stage: In this stage the mouth is closed, the anterior 
part of tongue is raised against the hard palate anterior to the 
bolus of food to push the masticated food progressively in 
the posterior part of the oral cavity. The soft palate closes 
down onto the back of the tongue to help form bolus of 
food. Now the hyoid bone moves up and food is pushed 
from oral cavity to the oropharynx through oropharyngeal 
isthmus.
Second stage: This stage is very rapid. The nasopharyngeal 
isthmus is closed by the elevation of the soft palate and 
contraction of Passavant’s ridge to prevent entry of food into 
the nasopharynx. The laryngeal inlet is closed by 
approximation of the aryepiglottic folds to prevent entry of 
food into the larynx. Now the pharynx and larynx are 
elevated behind the hyoid bone by the longitudinal muscles 
of the pharynx and the bolus of food is pushed down over 
the posterior surface of the epiglottis by gravity and 
contraction of superior and middle constrictors. Thus food 
passes from the oropharynx to the laryngopharynx. This is 
followed by rapid downward displacement of the larynx and 
pharynx (by infrahyoid muscles), which reopens the 
laryngeal orifice.
Third 
stage: In 
this 
stage, 
propulsive 
action 
thyropharyngeus followed by relaxation of cricopharyngeus
pushes food, which passes from laryngopharynx to the 
esophagus. From here it enters into the stomach by 
peristaltic movements in the esophageal wall.
PHARYNGEAL SPACES
These are potential spaces in relation to pharynx, viz.
1. Retropharyngeal space: It is situated behind the pharynx 
and extends from the base of the skull above to the 
bifurcation of trachea below.
2. Parapharyngeal space: It is situated on the side of the 
pharynx. It contains carotid vessels, internal jugular 
vein, last four cranial nerves, and cervical sympathetic 
chain.
PALATINE TONSILS
There are two palatine tonsils (commonly called tonsils). 
Each tonsil is an almond-shaped mass of lymphoid tissue 
situated in the triangular fossa (tonsillar fossa) of the lateral 
wall of the oropharynx between the anterior and posterior 
pillars of fauces. The anterior pillar is formed by 
palatoglossal arch and posterior pillar is formed by 
palatopharyngeal arch (Fig. 14.15).
--- Page 224 ---
Pharynx and Palate
N.B. The actual size of tonsil is much bigger than it appears 
on oropharyngeal examination because parts of tonsil 
extend upwards into the soft palate, downwards into the 
base of the tongue and anteriorly underneath the 
palatoglossal arch.
Boundaries of the Tonsillar Fossa/Sinus
Anterior: 
 Palatoglossal arch containing palatoglossus 
muscle.
Posterior: 
 Palatopharyngeal arch containing palato-
pharyngeus muscle.
Apex: 
Soft palate, where both arches meet.
Base: 
 Dorsal surface of the posterior one-third of 
the tongue.
Lateral wall 
(or tonsillar bed): Superior constrictor muscle (mainly).
Tonsillar Bed (Fig. 14.15)
It is formed from within outwards by:
(a) pharyngobasilar fascia,
(b) superior constrictor muscle, and
(c) buccopharyngeal fascia.
External Features
The tonsil presents the following external features:
1. Medial surface: It is free and bulges into the oropharynx. 
It is lined by non-keratinized stratified squamous 
epithelium, which dips into the substance of tonsil 
forming crypts. The number of tonsillar crypts vary 
from 12 to 15 and their openings can be seen on the 
medial surface. One of the crypts situated near the upper 
part of the tonsil is very large and deep. It is called crypta 
magna or intratonsillar cleft and represents the remnant 
of the second pharyngeal pouch. The crypts may be 
filled with cheesy material consisting of epithelial cells, 
bacteria, and food debris.
2. Lateral surface (Figs 14.15 and 14.16): It is covered by a 
well-defined fibrous tissue, which forms the tonsillar 
hemicapsule. Between the capsule and the bed of tonsil 
is the loose areolar tissue (peritonsillar space), which 
makes it easy to dissect the tonsil in this plane during 
tonsillectomy. It is also the site of collection of pus in 
peritonsillar abscess.
The superior constrictor separates this surface from 
the following structures (Fig. 14.16):
(a) Facial artery and two of its branches, the ascending 
palatine and tonsillar.
(b) Styloglossus muscle and glossopharyngeal nerve.
(c) Styloid process (when elongated).
(d) Angle of mandible and medial pterygoid muscle.
(e) Submandibular salivary gland.
The internal carotid artery is about 2.5 cm 
posterolateral to the tonsil.
3. Anterior border: It passes underneath the palatoglossal 
arch.
4. Posterior 
border: 
passes 
underneath 
palatopharyngeal arch.
5. Upper pole: It extends up into the soft palate. Its medial 
surface is covered by a semilunar fold extending between 
the anterior and posterior pillars enclosing a potential 
space called supratonsillar fossa.
6. Lower pole: It is attached to the tongue by a band of 
fibrous tissue called suspensory ligament of the tonsil.
Pharyngeal venous plexus
Buccopharyngeal fascia
Superior constrictor
Palatine tonsil
Tongue
Suspensory ligament of tonsil
Ramus of mandible
Medial pterygoid
Glossopharyngeal nerve
Styloglossus
Facial artery
Submandibular salivary gland
Tonsillar fossa
Paratonsillar vein
Pharyngobasilar fascia
Fig. 14.16 Horizontal section through right palatine tonsil showing structures deep to its lateral surface.
--- Page 225 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
N.B. A triangular fold of mucous membrane extends from 
anterior pillar to the anteroinferior part of the tonsil. It 
encloses a potential space called anterior tonsillar space.
The tonsil is separated from the tongue by a sulcus called 
tonsillolingual sulcus.
Surface anatomy: An oval area 1.25 cm above and in front 
of the angle of the mandible, marked in the parotid region of 
face indicates the location of tonsil on the surface.
Arterial Supply of the Tonsil (Fig. 14.17)
The following arteries supply the tonsil:
1. Tonsillar branch of facial artery (it is the principal artery 
and enters the lower pole of the tonsil by piercing the 
superior constrictor).
2. Dorsalis linguae branches of lingual artery.
3. Ascending palatine, a branch of facial artery.
4. Ascending pharyngeal, a branch of external carotid 
artery.
5. Greater palatine (descending palatine), a branch of 
maxillary artery.
Venous Drainage of the Tonsil
The veins from tonsil drain into paratonsillar vein. The 
paratonsillar vein descends from the soft palate across the 
lateral aspect of the tonsillar capsule and pierces the superior 
constrictor to drain into pharyngeal venous plexus.
Lymphatic Drainage of the Tonsil
The lymphatics of tonsil pierce the superior constrictor and 
drain into the upper deep cervical lymph nodes, particularly 
the jugulodigastric lymph node. It is often called tonsillar 
lymph node because it is primarily enlarged in infection of 
the tonsil (tonsillitis). The tonsillar lymph node is located 
below the angle of the mandible.
Nerve Supply of the Tonsil
Palatine tonsil is supplied by the glossopharyngeal nerve and 
lesser palatine branches of the sphenopalatine ganglion.
• Acute tonsillitis: The tonsils are the frequent sites of 
acute infection especially in school-going children. It may 
affect adults also. This condition is called acute tonsillitis. 
It is mostly seen in viral infection. It is rare in infants and 
persons above 50 years of age.
• Acute follicular tonsillitis: In this condition, the infection 
spreads into crypts, which become filled with purulent 
material presenting at the openings of crypts as yellowish 
spots.
• Bleeding from tonsillar fossa after tonsillectomy: It 
most commonly occurs due to damage of paratonsillar 
vein. The blood clots should be removed in order to check 
bleeding. If not removed, they interfere with the retraction 
of the vessel walls by preventing the contraction of the 
surrounding muscles. The postoperative edema of tonsillar 
bed after tonsillectomy can affect the glossopharyngeal 
nerve leading to loss of sensation in the posterior 
one-third of the tongue.
Clinical correlation
Histological Structure (Fig. 14.18) 
Histologically, the tonsil presents the following features:
1. Its oral surface is lined by stratified squamous 
non-keratinized epithelium, which dips into underlying 
tissues to form crypts.
2. Presence of lymphatic nodules on the sides of the crypts.
3. Presence of mucous glands in the deeper plane.
Development of the Tonsil
The tonsil develops in the region of 2nd pharyngeal pouch. 
The cells of endodermal lining of pouch proliferate and grow 
out as solid columns/buds into the surrounding mesenchyme. 
The central portions of these cell columns are canalized and 
form tonsillar clefts. The lymphoid cells from the surrounding 
mesenchyme accumulate around the crypts and differentiate 
into lymphoid follicles. The remnant of 2nd pharyngeal 
pouch is seen as supratonsillar/intratonsillar cleft at the 
upper pole of the tonsil.
Fig. 14.17 Arteries supplying the tonsil.
Ascending
pharyngeal
artery
Ascending
palatine
artery
Maxillary artery
Descending
palatine
artery
Tonsillar artery
TONSIL
Dorsalis linguae
arteries
Lingual
artery
Facial
artery
--- Page 226 ---
Pharynx and Palate
PHARYNGOTYMPANIC TUBE 
(SYN. EUSTACHIAN TUBE/AUDITORY TUBE)
It is a mucous-lined osseocartilaginous channel, which 
connects the nasopharynx with the tympanic cavity (Fig. 
14.19). It maintains the equilibrium of air pressure on either 
side of the tympanic membrane for its proper vibration.
In an adult, it is about 36 mm long and runs downwards, 
forwards, and medially from its tympanic end.
Parts (Fig. 14.9)
The pharyngotympanic tube is divided into two parts, viz.
1. Osseous or bony part: It is posterolateral part and forms 
one-third (12 mm) of the total length of the tube. It lies 
between the tympanic and petrous parts of the temporal 
bone and opens into the middle ear cavity.
2. Cartilaginous part: It is anteromedial part and forms 
two-third (24 mm) of the tube.
The two parts meet at isthmus, which is the narrowest part 
of the tube. The cartilaginous part is made of a single piece 
of elastic fibrocartilage, which is folded upon itself in such a 
way that it forms the whole of the medial wall, roof, and a 
part of the lateral wall. The rest of the lateral wall is filled by 
the fibrous membrane.
The cartilaginous part lies in the groove between the 
petrous part of the temporal bone and the posterior border 
of the greater wing of the sphenoid bone.
Ends of the Tube
The tympanic end of the tube is small and bony. It is situated 
in the anterior wall of the middle ear, a little above its floor.
The pharyngeal end is relatively large and slit-like 
(vertically). It is situated in the lateral wall of the pharynx, 
about 1.25 cm behind the posterior end of inferior nasal 
concha. The pharyngeal orifice is the widest part of the tube.
Lining of the Tube
The tube is lined by pseudostratified ciliated columnar 
epithelium with interspersed goblet cells. The cilia beat in 
the direction of nasopharynx and thus help to drain the 
secretions and fluid from the middle ear into the 
nasopharynx.
Pharyngotympanic Tubes of an Infant and an Adult
The features of the tube differ in infants and adults. These 
are enumerated in Table 14.4.
Table 14.4 Differences between the eustachian tube of an 
infant and an adult
Infant
Adult
Length
18 mm
36 mm
Direction
More or less 
horizontal (makes an 
angle of 10° with the 
horizontal plane)
Oblique, directed 
downwards, forwards 
and medially (makes 
an angle of 45° with 
the horizontal plane)
Angulation of 
isthmus
No angulation
Angulation present
Fig. 14.18 Histological structure of the palatine tonsil. 
(Source: Fig. 14.6, Page 147, Selective Anatomy Prep 
Manual for Undergraduates, Vol. I, Vishram Singh, Copyright 
Elsevier 2014, All rights reserved.)
Stratified squamous
epithelium (non-keratinized)
Crypt
Subendothelial
lymph nodules
Connective tissue
Mucous acini
Fig. 14.19 Bony and cartilaginous parts, isthmus, tympanic, and pharyngeal ends of the pharyngotympanic tube.
Levator palati
Ascending
pharyngeal artery
Ascending
palatine artery
Superior constrictor of 
pharynx
Nasopharynx
Pharyngeal end
Isthmus
Tympanic end
Middle ear 
(tympanic) cavity
Mastoid
antrum
Bony part
Cartilaginous
part
--- Page 227 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
Since the eustachian tube is shorter, wider, and more 
horizontal in infants, the infection from nasopharynx can 
easily reach the middle ear; for this reason, middle ear 
infections are more common in infants and young 
children than in adults.
Clinical correlation
Functions
The following are the functions of the pharyngotympanic 
tube:
1. Maintains equilibrium of air pressure on either side of 
tympanic membrane. At rest, the tube remains closed 
but during swallowing, yawning, and sneezing it reflexly 
opens.
2. Protection of middle ear by preventing the transmission 
of high sound pressure from nasopharynx to middle ear 
as normally the tube remains closed.
3. Clearance of middle ear secretions by active opening 
and closing of the tube. The cilia of mucous lining of the 
tube beat in the direction of nasopharynx and drain the 
secretion of the middle ear into the nasopharynx.
N.B. An individual swallows once every minute when awake 
and once every five minutes when asleep.
The pharyngotympanic tube equalizes the pressure in the 
middle ear with the atmospheric pressure to permit free 
movement of the tympanic membrane. If the tube is blocked 
due to inflammation of tubal tonsil, the residual air in the 
middle ear is absorbed into the blood vessels of its mucous 
membrane, causing a fall of pressure in it and consequent 
retraction 
tympanic 
membrane. 
This 
causes 
disturbance of hearing and severe earache due to retraction 
of tympanic membrane (RTM). The persistently reduced air 
pressure within the middle ear is corrected by periodic 
introduction of air by eustachian catheter.
Clinical correlation
PALATE
The term palate refers to the roof of the mouth (L. palate =
roof of the mouth). It forms a partition between the nasal 
and oral cavities.
The palate consists of two parts, viz.
1. Hard palate, which forms the anterior four-fifth of the 
palate, and
2. Soft palate, which forms the posterior one-fifth of the 
palate.
HARD PALATE
The hard palate is a partition between the nasal and oral 
cavities. Its anterior two-third is formed by the palatine 
processes of the maxillae and posterior one-third by the 
horizontal plates of the palatine bones (Fig. 14.20).
The superior and inferior surfaces of the hard palate form 
the floor of the nasal cavity and the roof of the oral cavity, 
respectively.
 Anterolaterally, the hard palate becomes continuous with 
the alveolar arches and gums.
 The posterior margin of the hard palate is free and 
provides attachment to the soft palate.
The inferior surface of the hard palate presents the following 
features:
1. Incisive fossa, a small pit anteriorly in the midline 
behind the incisor teeth, into which open the incisive 
canals. Each incisive canal/foramen (right and left) 
pierces the corresponding side and ascend into the 
corresponding nasal cavity. The incisive foramen 
transmits terminal parts of the nasopalatine nerve and 
greater palatine vessels.
2. Greater palatine foramen, one on each side, lies in the 
posterolateral corner of the hard palate medial to the last 
molar tooth. It transmits the greater palatine nerve and 
vessels.
3. Lesser palatine foramina (1–3 in number) on each 
side are in the pyramidal process of palatine bone and 
are located just behind the greater palatine foramen. 
They provide passage to lesser palatine nerve and 
vessels.
4. Posterior nasal spine is a conical projection in the 
median plane on the sharp free posterior border of the 
hard palate.
5. Palatine crest is a curved ridge near the posterior border 
of the hard palate.
6. Masticatory mucosa is the mucous membrane lining the 
hard palate. In the anterior part, it is firmly united with 
the periosteum by multiple fibrous strands (Sharpey’s 
fibres), hence moving bolus of food does not displace 
the mucous membrane. It presents:
(a) transverse masticatory ridges on either side of mid-
line, and
(b) palatine raphe, a narrow ridge of mucous membrane 
extending anteroposteriorly in the midline from a 
little papilla overlying the incisive fossa.
The hard palate is lined by keratinized stratified squamous 
epithelium.
Arterial Supply
This is by greater palatine arteries from the third part of the 
maxillary artery. Each artery emerges from greater palatine 
foramen and passes forwards around the palate (lateral to 
the nerve) to enter the incisive canal and pass up into the 
nose.
--- Page 228 ---
Pharynx and Palate
Venous Drainage
The veins of hard palate drain into the pterygoid venous 
plexus (mainly) and pharyngeal venous plexus.
Nerve Supply
The hard palate is supplied by greater palatine and 
nasopalatine nerves derived from pterygopalatine ganglion. 
The greater palatine nerve supplies whole of the palate except 
anterior part of palate behind incisor teeth (the area of 
premaxilla), which is supplied by nasopalatine nerves.
Lymphatic Drainage
The lymphatics from palate drain mostly into the upper deep 
cervical lymph nodes and few into retropharyngeal lymph 
nodes.
SOFT PALATE
The soft palate is a mobile muscular flap, which hangs down 
from the posterior border of the hard palate into the 
pharyngeal cavity like a curtain or velum. It separates the 
nasopharynx from oropharynx.
External Features
The soft palate presents the following external features:
1. Anterior (oral) surface is concave and marked by a 
median raphe.
2. Posterior surface is convex and continuous with the 
floor of the nasal cavity.
3. Superior border is attached to the posterior border of 
the hard palate.
4. Inferior border is free and forms the anterior boundary 
of the pharyngeal isthmus. A conical, small, tongue-like 
projection hanging down from its middle is called uvula.
On each side from the base of uvula, two curved folds 
of mucous membrane extend laterally and downwards:
(a) The anterior fold merges inferiorly with the side of 
the tongue (at the junction of oral and pharyngeal 
parts) and is known as palatoglossal fold. The 
palatoglossal fold contains the palatoglossus muscle 
and forms the lateral boundary of the oropharyngeal 
isthmus.
(b) The posterior fold merges inferiorly with the 
lateral wall of the pharynx and is known as 
palatopharyngeal fold. The palatopharyngeal fold 
contains palatopharyngeus muscle and forms the 
posterior boundary of the tonsillar fossa.
Structure
The soft palate is made up of a fold of mucous membrane 
enclosing five pairs of muscles. The nasal surface of the soft 
palate is covered by pseudostratified ciliated columnar 
epithelium except posteriorly (the part that abuts on the 
Passavant’s ridge of posterior pharyngeal wall), which is 
lined by non-keratinized stratified squamous epithelium. 
The oral surface of the soft palate is thicker and lined by 
non-keratinized stratified squamous epithelium.
In the submucosa on both the surfaces are mucous glands, 
which are in plenty around the uvula and on the oral aspect 
of the soft palate. The mucosa on the oral surface of the soft 
Pterygoid
hamulus
Posterior nasal
aperture (choana)
Vomer
Palatine crest
Interpalatine suture
Lesser
palatine nerve
Lesser palatine foramina
Greater palatine foramen
Horizontal plate of palatine
Palatine process of maxilla
Intermaxillary suture
Alveolar arch
Incisive fossa
Greater palatine nerve
Palatomaxillary suture
Nasopalatine nerve
Fig. 14.20 Oral aspect of the hard palate.
--- Page 229 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
palate also contains some taste buds (especially in children) 
and lymphoid follicles.
Muscles
The soft palate consists of the five pairs of muscles 
(Fig. 14.21), viz.
1. Tensor palati (tensor veli palatini).
2. Levator palati (levator veli palatini).
3. Palatoglossus.
4. Palatopharyngeus.
5. Musculus uvulae.
N.B. All the muscles of soft palate are extrinsic except
musculus uvulae, which are intrinsic.
The origin, insertion, and actions of muscles of the soft 
palate are given in Table 14.5.
Table 14.5 Origin, insertion, and actions of muscle of the soft palate
Muscle
Origin
Insertion
Actions
Tensor palati (thin 
triangular muscle; 
Fig. 14.22)
(a) Lateral aspect of the cartilaginous 
part of the auditory tube
(b) Adjoining part of the greater wing 
of the sphenoid including its spine
Muscle descends, converges to form 
a tendon, which hooks around the 
pterygoid hamulus and then 
expands to form the palatine 
aponeurosis for attachment to:
• Posterior border of the hard 
palate
• Inferior surface of the hard 
palate behind the palatine crest
(a) Tightens the soft palate
(b) Helps in opening the 
auditory tube
Levator palati
(a cylindrical muscle lying 
deep to tensor palati)
(a) Medial aspect of the cartilaginous 
part of the auditory tube
(b) Adjoining part of the petrous 
temporal bone (inferior surface of 
its apex anterior to carotid canal)
Muscle runs downwards and 
medially and spreads out to be 
inserted on the upper surface of 
the palatine aponeurosis
(a) Elevates the soft palate 
to close the pharyngeal 
isthmus
(b) Helps in opening the 
auditory tube
Musculus uvulae
(a longitudinal muscle 
strip, one on either side of 
the median plane within 
the palatine aponeurosis)
(a) Posterior nasal spine
(b) Palatine aponeurosis
Mucous membrane of the uvula
Pulls the uvula forward to 
its own side
Palatoglossus
Oral surface of the palatine 
aponeurosis
Descends into palatoglossal
arch, to be inserted into the
side of the tongue at the
junction of its oral and
pharyngeal parts
(a) Pulls up the root of the 
tongue
(b) Approximates the 
palatoglossal arches to 
close the oropharyngeal 
isthmus
Palatopharyngeus
(consist of two fasciculi,
which are separated
by the levator palati)
(a) Anterior fasciculus: from posterior 
border of the hard palate
(b) Posterior fasciculus: from palatine 
aponeurosis
Descends in the palatopharyngeal
arch and inserted into the
• Median fibrous raphe of 
pharyngeal wall
• Posterior border of the lamina 
of thyroid cartilage
Raises the walls of pharynx 
and larynx during 
swallowing
Fig. 14.21 Muscles of the soft palate.
Body of
sphenoid
Petrous part of temporal bone
Auditory tube (cartilaginous part)
Levator palati
Tensor palati
Pterygoid hamulus
Palatoglossus
Palatopharyngeus
Musculus
uvulae
Palatine
aponeurosis
Spine of sphenoid
--- Page 230 ---
Pharynx and Palate
Functions
1. Separates the oropharynx from nasopharynx during 
swallowing so that food does not enter the nose.
2. Isolates the oral cavity from oropharynx during chewing 
so that breathing is not affected.
3. Helps to modify the quality of voice, by varying the 
degree of closure of the pharyngeal isthmus.
4. Protects the damage of nasal mucosa during sneezing, 
by appropriately dividing and directing the blast of air 
through both nasal and oral cavities.
5. Prevents the entry of sputum into nose during coughing 
by directing it into the oral cavity.
Paralysis of soft palate: The paralysis of the muscles of 
soft palate (due to lesion of vagus nerve) produces:
(a) nasal regurgitation of liquids,
(b) nasal twang in voice,
(c) flattening of the palatal arch on the side of the lesion, 
(d) deviation of uvula, opposite to the side of the lesion.
Clinical correlation
Arterial Supply
The soft palate is supplied by the following arteries:
1. Lesser palatine branches of the maxillary artery.
2. Ascending palatine branch of the facial artery.
3. Palatine branches of the ascending pharyngeal artery.
Venous Drainage
The venous blood from palate is drained into pharyngeal 
venous plexus and pterygoid venous plexus.
Lymphatic Drainage
The lymphatics from soft palate drain into retropharyngeal 
and upper deep cervical lymph nodes.
Nerve Supply
Motor supply: All the muscles of soft palate are supplied by 
the cranial root of accessory nerve via pharyngeal plexus 
except tensor palati, which is supplied by the nerve to medial 
pterygoid, a branch of the mandibular nerve.
Sensory supply: General sensations from palate are carried by:
 Lesser palatine nerves to the maxillary division of 
trigeminal nerve via pterygopalatine ganglion.
 Glossopharyngeal nerve.
Gag reflex: It is a protective reflex characterized by the 
elevation of the palate and contraction of the pharyngeal 
muscles with associated retching and gagging in response 
to stimulation of the mucous membrane of the oropharynx. It 
occurs when the palate, tonsil, posterior part of the tongue, 
or posterior pharyngeal wall are touched by unfamiliar 
objects such as swab, spatula, etc. The afferent limb of the 
reflex is provided by the glossopharyngeal nerve and 
efferent limb by the vagus nerve.
Clinical correlation
DEVELOPMENT OF THE PALATE
The face develops from five processes, which surround the 
primitive mouth or stomatodeum. The processes are as 
follows (Fig. 14. 23):
1. Frontonasal process – a single process.
2. Maxillary processes (two) – one on each side.
3. Mandibular processes (two) – one on each side.
Fig. 14.22 Origin and course of the tensor palati muscles 
and formation of the palatine aponeurosis by the expansion 
of their tendons underneath the hard palate behind the 
palatine crest.
Palatine
crest
Tensor
palati
Auditory
tube
Superior
constrictor
Carotid canal
Spine of
sphenoid
Foramen spinosum
Palatine
aponeurosis
Pterygoid humulus
Fig. 14.23 Development of the face. Note the five processes 
around the primitive mouth (stomatodeum).
Stomodeum
Frontal
prominence
Medial
Lateral
Frontonasal process
Maxillary process
Mandibular process
Nasal
processes
Nasal pit
--- Page 231 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
The primary palate (also called premaxilla) develops from 
the frontonasal process. The secondary palate develops from 
the palatine process of the maxillary processes.
Two palatine processes (one on each side) develop from 
the inner aspects of the maxillary processes and fuse in the 
midline to form the secondary palate, which is soon joined 
by nasal septum (Fig. 14.24).
The hard palate is formed by the fusion of the secondary 
palate with the primary palate. The incisive foramina mark 
the junction of the two components of the palate. The fusion 
takes place from anterior to posterior parts.
The soft palate develops from two folds that grow 
posteriorly from the posterior edge of the palatal processes. 
Thus uvula is the last structure to develop. The two folds 
unite to form the soft palate.
Fig. 14.25 Varieties of the cleft palate: A, complete cleft: 
1 = unilateral, 2 =  bilateral; B, partial cleft: 1 = bifid uvula, 
2 =  cleft soft palate, 3 = cleft of soft palate extending into 
the hard palate.
Fig. 14.24 Development of the palate: A, separation of the nasal cavities from each other and from oral cavity; 
B, embryological subdivisions of the palate and their source of development.
Nasal septum
Nasal cavities
Oral cavity
Palatine processes
Fused palatine processes
Philtrum of upper lip
Premaxilla (primary palate)
from frontonasal process
Secondary (definitive) palate
from palatine process of
maxillary processes
Soft palate
Nasal septum
Cleft palate (Fig. 14.25): The defective fusion of various 
segments of the palate gives rise to clefts in the palate. 
These vary considerably in degree, leading to varieties of 
cleft palate, namely,
(a) Complete cleft
– Unilateral complete cleft occurs if maxillary process 
on one side does not fuse with the premaxilla. It is 
always associated with the cleft lip.
– Bilateral complete cleft occurs if both the maxillary 
processes fail to fuse with the premaxilla. In this 
type, secondary palate is divided into two equal 
halves by a median cleft with an anterior V-shaped 
cleft separating the premaxilla completely.
Clinical correlation
(b) Incomplete or partial cleft: The following stages may 
occur
– Bifid uvula—cleft involving only uvula. It is of no 
clinical importance.
– Cleft of soft palate—involving uvula and soft palate.
– Cleft of soft palate—extending into the hard palate.
Philtrum
Premaxilla
Secondary
palate
Hard palate
Soft palate
Uvula
--- Page 232 ---
Pharynx and Palate
Golden Facts to Remember
  Killian’s dehiscence
A weak area in the posterior wall of pharynx 
between the two parts of inferior constrictor muscle
  Principal artery of tonsil
Tonsillar branch of the facial artery
  Common source of bleeding after tonsillectomy
Paratonsillar vein
  Tonsillar lymph node
Jugulodigastric lymph node
  Most common variety of cleft palate
Unilateral cleft palate involving the hard palate
  Largest tonsils
Palatine tonsils
  Quinsy
Chronic infection of peritonsillar space
  Coffin corner
Lingual tonsillar sulcus
Case 1
A 47-year-old man came in the emergency OPD and 
complained that while eating fish something got stuck 
in his throat. It was causing pain and lot of discomfort. 
The physical examination of throat revealed that 
discomfort increases on moving the thyroid cartilage 
from side to side. The physician concluded that the fish 
bone was stuck in the piriform fossa.
Questions
1. What is piriform fossa?
2. What are medial and lateral boundaries of the 
piriform fossa?
3. What nerve is likely to be injured during the 
removal of the fish bone?
Answers
1. Recess in the lateral wall of laryngopharynx, one on 
either side of laryngeal inlet.
2. Piriform 
fossa 
bounded 
medially 
aryepiglottic fold and quadrangular membrane 
of the larynx and laterally by inner surface of the 
thyrohyoid membrane and lamina of thyroid 
cartilage.
3. Internal laryngeal nerve.
Case 2
An 8-year-old boy was taken by his parents to the 
physician and complained that their son was suffering 
from recurrent attacks of sore throat and for the past 
few days he has difficulty in swallowing and feeling pain 
not only in his throat but also in his ears. On 
examination of oropharynx, the physician found that 
both the tonsils were enlarged and almost touching 
each other in the midline. The palpation of cervical 
lymph nodes revealed enlarged and tender tonsillar 
nodes. The boy was diagnosed as a case of tonsillitis.
Questions
1. What is meant by the term tonsil?
2. What are tonsillar lymph nodes?
3. What was the cause of ear ache?
Answers
1. Unless otherwise stated, reference to tonsil always 
refers to the palatine tonsil.
2. Jugulodigastric lymph nodes.
3. The tonsil is supplied by the glossopharyngeal nerve 
and tympanic branch of this nerve supplies mucous 
membrane of the middle ear (tympanic cavity). 
Therefore pain of tonsillitis is referred to the ear.
Clinical Case Study
--- Page 233 ---
Larynx
CHAPTER
The larynx is the upper expanded part of the lower respiratory 
tract, which is modified for producing voice, hence it is also 
called voice box/organ of phonation. It acts as a sphincter at 
the inlet of lower respiratory tract to protect the trachea and 
the bronchial tree from entry of any material other than the 
air. If this protective role is deranged, laryngeal incompetence 
results, and food and fluid may be aspirated into trachea. 
Further, the upward and downward movements of the larynx 
help in swallowing.
The functions of larynx include the following:
1. Phonation.
2. Respiration.
3. Protection.
4. Deglutition.
N.B. The primary (most important) function of the larynx is 
protection of the lower respiratory tract. The phonation has 
developed later with evolution and is related to the motor 
speech area of the brain.
Location and Extent
The larynx is situated in the anterior midline of the upper part 
of the neck in front of laryngopharynx. It extends from the 
root of the tongue to the trachea and lies in front of the 3rd, 
4th, 5th, and 6th cervical vertebrae. However, in children and 
females it lies at a little higher level.
Size
The average measurements of larynx in males and females 
are as follows:
 
Vertical
Transverse
Anteroposterior
Male
44 mm
43 mm
36 mm
Female
36 mm
41 mm
26 mm
Till puberty the size of larynx in both males and females is 
more or less same but at puberty male larynx grows rapidly 
and becomes larger than the female larynx. The pubertal 
growth of the larynx in adult female does not differ much 
from a child, for this reason the pitch of voice is high in both 
females and children. In males, the characteristic pubertal 
growth of angle of the thyroid cartilage (Adam’s apple) makes 
the voice louder and low pitched.
SKELETON (Fig. 15.3 )
The skeletal framework of the larynx consists of a series of 
cartilages, which are connected to one another by ligaments, 
and fibrous membranes, and moved by a number of muscles.
N.B. The hyoid bone is closely associated to the larynx with 
distinctive functional roles. However, it is usually considered 
as a separate structure.
CARTILAGES
The larynx is composed of nine cartilages, of which three are 
unpaired and three are paired:
1. Unpaired cartilages: The unpaired cartilages are large 
and comprise:
(a) Thyroid
(b) Cricoid
(c) Epiglottis
2. Paired cartilages: The paired cartilages are small and 
comprise:
(a) Arytenoid
(b) Corniculate
(c) Cuneiform
The principal cartilages of the larynx are, cricoid, thyroid, 
and two arytenoids (Fig. 15.1).
Thyroid cartilage
It is most prominent and acts as a shield to protect the larynx 
from the front. It is consists of two quadrilateral laminae, 
which meet in front at an angle called thyroid angle, which is 
acute in males and obtuse in females (like subpubic angle). 
The angle measures 90° in males and 120° in females.
--- Page 234 ---
Larynx
The thyroid angle is prominent in males and it is responsi-
ble for prominence on the front of the neck called Adam’s 
apple.
The posterior surface of the thyroid cartilage in the 
median plane provides attachment (from above downward) 
to following structures (Fig. 15.2A):
1. Thyroepiglottic ligament.
2. A pair of vestibular ligaments.
3. A pair of vocal ligaments.
The posterior border of each lamina is free and prolonged 
upwards and downwards as superior and inferior horns/cornu.
It provides conjoined insertion to the following three muscles 
(Fig. 15.2B):
1. Palatopharyngeus. 
2. Salpingopharyngeus.
3. Stylopharyngeus.
The outer surface of each lamina presents an oblique line and 
provides attachment to the following three muscles; from 
Fig. 15.1 Principal cartilages of the larynx.
Superior cornu
Superior tubercle
Oblique
line
Inferior cornu
Anterolateral aspect
Lateral aspect
Laminae
Laryngeal prominence
(Adam’s apple)
A. THYROID CARTILAGE
B. CRICOID CARTILAGE
Facet for articulation
with arytenoid cartilage
Facet for articulation
with thyroid cartilage
Lamina
Lamina
Arch
Lateral aspect
Anterolateral aspect
C. ARYTENOID CARTILAGE
Apex
Posterior surface
Anterolateral
surface
Medial surface
Vocal
process
Anterolateral
surface
Muscular
process
Medial aspect
Anterolateral aspect
--- Page 235 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
above downwards and from medial to lateral sides, these are 
(Fig. 15.2B) as follows:
1. Thyrohyoid.
2. Sternothyroid.
3. Inferior constrictor (thyropharyngeus part only).
Cricoid cartilage
This is a signet-shaped ring of cartilage with a narrow 
anterior arch and a broad posterior lamina. The cricoid 
cartilage is situated at the level of C6 vertebra and completely 
encircles the lumen of the larynx. It is considered as the 
foundation stone of the larynx. The posterior surface of 
lamina presents a median ridge and two depressed areas on 
each side of this ridge.
Epiglottis (Fig. 15.3)
It is leaf-like and extends up behind the hyoid bone and the 
base of the tongue. Its broad upper end is free and forms the 
upper boundary of the laryngeal inlet, while the lower end 
(stalk) is pointed and connected to the posterior surface of 
the angle of the thyroid by thyroepiglottic ligament.
The anterior surface of epiglottis is connected with the base 
of the tongue by median and lateral glossoepiglottic folds. The 
depression on each side of the median fold is called vallecula.
The posterior surface of epiglottis presents a tubercle in 
its lower part.
N.B. The epiglottis is rudimentary in human beings but in 
macrosomatic animals it is elongated and extends beyond 
the soft palate in the nasopharynx.
Arytenoid cartilages
The paired arytenoid cartilages articulate with the lateral 
parts of the upper border of cricoid lamina. Each arytenoid 
cartilage is pyramidal and presents an apex, base, three 
surfaces (posterior, anterolateral, and medial), and two 
processes—muscular and vocal (Fig. 15.1).
The muscular process projects laterally and backwards 
whereas the vocal process is directed forwards.
The base of arytenoid cartilage is concave and articulates 
with the upper border of the lamina of cricoid cartilage. The 
base is prolonged anteriorly to form the vocal process and 
laterally to form the muscular process.
The apex is curved posteromedially and articulates with 
the corniculate cartilage.
Corniculate cartilages (of Santorini)
These are two small conical nodules, which articulate with 
the apices of the arytenoid cartilages. They are directed 
posteromedially and lie in the posterior parts of the 
aryepiglottic folds.
Cuneiform cartilages (of Wrisberg)
They are tiny rod-shaped cartilages lying in the posterior 
parts of the aryepiglottic folds just above the corniculate 
cartilages.
TYPES OF LARYNGEAL CARTILAGES
The thyroid, cricoid, and basal parts of arytenoid cartilages 
are composed of hyaline cartilage and tend to ossify after 25 
years of age and can be seen in radiographs.
The apices of arytenoid cartilages and other cartilages—
epiglottis, corniculate, and cuneiform are made up of elastic 
cartilage and do not ossify.
JOINTS
The laryngeal joints include paired cricothyroid, cricoaryte-
noid, and arytenocorniculate joints (Fig. 15.4).
Fig. 15.2 Attachments of the muscles and ligaments on the thyroid cartilage: A, on the posterior surface; B, on the outer 
surface and posterior border of the lamina.
Thyroepiglottic
ligament
Epiglottis
Cricoid cartilage
Vestibular ligament
Inner aspect of
thyroid cartilage
Vocal ligament
Thyroarytenoid
muscle
Tendon of
esophagus
Posterior
cricoarytenoid
Vocalis muscle
Palatopharyngeus
Salpingopharyngeus
Stylopharyngeus
Posterior
border of
 lamina of
thyroid
cartilage
Thyrohyoid (origin)
Lamina of 
thyroid cartilage
Sternothyroid
(insertion)
Thyropharyngeus
(origin)
Cricothyroid
Cricoid cartilage
--- Page 236 ---
Larynx
CRICOTHYROID JOINT
It is a plane synovial joint between the inferior cornu of the 
thyroid cartilage and side of cricoid cartilage. The recurrent 
laryngeal nerve enters the larynx very close to this joint. This 
joint permits two types of movements, viz.
1. Rotatory movement, in which cricoid rotates on the 
inferior cornua of the thyroid cartilage around a 
transverse axis, which passes transversely through both 
cricothyroid joints.
2. Gliding movement, in which cricoid glides, to a limited 
extent, in different directions of the thyroid cornua.
CRICOARYTENOID JOINT
It is a tiny plane synovial joint between the base of the 
arytenoid and lateral part of the upper border of the lamina 
of cricoid cartilage. This joint permits two types of 
movements, viz.
1. Rotatory movement, in which arytenoid cartilage moves 
around a vertical axis, thus abducting or adducting the 
vocal cords.
2. Gliding movement, in which one arytenoid glides towards 
the other or away from it, thus closing or opening the 
posterior part of glottis.
Fig. 15.3 Skeleton of the larynx: A, anterior view; B, posterior view; C, lateral view.
Lateral thyrohyoid
ligament
Median thyrohyoid
ligament
Cricothyroid ligament
Epiglottis
Hyoid bone
Thyrohyoid membrane
Cartilago triticea
Opening for superior
laryngeal vessels and
internal laryngeal nerve
Superior cornu of thyroid
Thyroid cartilage
Inferior cornu of thyroid
Cricothyroid membrane
Arch of cricoid cartilage
Cricotracheal membrane
Cartilago
triticea
Upper horn
Lower horn
Epiglottis
Hyoid bone
Thyrohyoid
membrane
Laryngeal
prominence
Oblique line of 
thyroid cartilage
Cricoid
cartilage
Tip of greater cornu of 
hyoid bone
Thyrohyoid
membrane
Cuneiform
cartilage
Corniculate
cartilage
Arytenoid
cartilage
Lamina of
cricoid
cartilage
--- Page 237 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
ARYTENOCORNICULATE JOINT
It is a synovial joint between the arytenoid and corniculate 
cartilages. It is of no functional significance.
LIGAMENTS AND MEMBRANES
The skeletal framework of the larynx is interconnected 
by a number of ligaments and fibrous membranes. The 
most significant fibrous membranes connecting skeletal 
framework of the larynx are thyrohyoid, cricothyroid, 
quadrangular, and cricovocal membranes.
EXTRINSIC
The extrinsic ligaments and membranes are outside the inner 
tube of the fibroelastic tissue of laryngeal cavity (Fig. 15.3):
1. Thyrohyoid membrane and ligaments: The thyrohyoid 
membrane extends from the upper border of the thyroid 
cartilage to the upper border of the hyoid bone. It 
ascends behind the concave posterior surface of the 
hyoid bone. Between posterior aspect of hyoid and 
membrane lies the subhyoid bursa. In the median and 
lateral parts, the thyrohyoid membrane thickens to form 
median and lateral thyrohyoid ligaments. The lateral 
thyrohyoid ligament on each side contains a small nodule 
of elastic cartilage called cartilago-triticea. The thyrohyoid 
membrane is pierced on either side by internal laryngeal 
nerve and superior laryngeal vessels.
2. Cricotracheal ligament: It connects the cricoid cartilage 
with the first tracheal ring.
3. Thyroepiglottic ligament: It attaches the lower narrow 
end of epiglottis to the posterior surface of thyroid angle.
4. Hyoepiglottic ligament: It connects the posterior aspect of 
hyoid with the anterior surface of the upper end of 
epiglottis.
Cricothyroid ligament: It connects the lower border of 
the thyroid cartilage to the cricoid cartilage in the 
midline.
INTRINSIC
The intrinsic ligaments and membranes are the parts of a 
broad sheet of fibroelastic tissue, which forms the inner tube 
of the laryngeal cavity outside its mucous lining. This 
fibroelastic tube is, however, interrupted on each side by the 
sinus of the larynx. The part above the sinus is called quadrate
or quadrangular membrane and part below the sinus is 
called cricovocal membrane or conus elasticus (Fig. 15.5):
1. Cricovocal membrane extends upwards and medially 
from the upper border of the arch of the cricoid cartilage. 
Its upper edge is free and attached anteriorly to the 
posterior surface of the thyroid cartilage and posteriorly 
to the vocal process of the arytenoid cartilage. It is slightly 
thickened to form the vocal ligament. The fold of 
mucous membrane over this ligament forms the vocal 
fold.
2. Vocal ligament is made up of yellow elastic tissue and 
extends anteroposteriorly from posterior surface of the 
thyroid cartilage to the vocal process of arytenoids 
cartilage.
3. Quadrangular membrane extends from sides of epiglottis 
to the arytenoids. Its lower edge is free and attached 
anteriorly to the posterior surface of the thyroid cartilage 
(above the cricothyroid membrane) and posteriorly to 
Fig. 15.4 Joints of the larynx.
Cricothyroid
joint
Cricoarytenoid
joint
Arytenocorniculate
joint
Corniculate
cartilage
Thyroid
 cartilage
Cricoid
cartilage
Arytenoid cartilage
Hyoepiglottic ligament
Epiglottis
Fat in the
pre-epiglottic space
(pre-epiglottic body)
Quadrangular
(quadrate)
membrane
Cuneiform
cartilage
Corniculate
cartilage
Arytenoid
cartilage
Cricovocal
membrane
Cricoid cartilage
Cricothyroid
membrane
Vocal ligament
Vestibular ligament
Thyrohyoid
membrane
Subhyoid bursa
Hyoid bone
Thyroepiglottic
ligament
Fig. 15.5 Sagittal section of the larynx showing ligaments 
and membranes. Note the location of quadrangular and 
cricovocal membranes.
--- Page 238 ---
Larynx
the lateral surface of the arytenoid cartilage (in front of 
muscular process). Its lower edge is thickened to form 
the vestibular ligament.
4. Vestibular ligament is made up of fibrous tissue and 
extends anteroposteriorly from posterior surface of the 
thyroid cartilage to the lateral surface of the arytenoid 
cartilage.
Extrinsic and intrinsic membranes and ligaments are 
summarized in Table 15.1.
MUSCLES
They are of two types: extrinsic and intrinsic.
EXTRINSIC
They attach the larynx to the surrounding structures and are 
responsible for the movement of the larynx as a whole.
All the extrinsic muscles are paired and include:
1. Palatopharyngeus.
2. Salpingopharyngeus.
3. Stylopharyngeus.
4. Thyrohyoid.
5. Sternothyroid.
All these muscles elevate the larynx except sternothyroid, 
which depresses the larynx.
The first three muscles are discussed in detail in Chapter 
14 and the last two in Chapter 6.
INTRINSIC (Fig. 15.6)
They attach the laryngeal cartilages to each other and are 
responsible for their movements. Their main functions are 
(a) open or close the laryngeal inlet,
(b) adduct and abduct the vocal cords, and
(c) increase or decrease the tension of the vocal cords.
Thus according to their actions, intrinsic muscles of the 
larynx are arranged into the following groups:
Thyroarytenoid
Aryepiglotticus
Thyroepiglotticus
Lateral
cricoarytenoid
Aryepiglotticus
Oblique arytenoid
Lateral cricoarytenoid
Posterior cricoarytenoid
Transverse
arytenoid
Vocal ligament
Lamina of 
thyroid cartilage
Vocalis
Thyroarytenoid
Anterior arch of
cricoid cartilage
Posterior
cricoarytenoid
Transverse
arytenoid
Muscular process
of arytenoid
Lateral
cricoarytenoid
Transverse
arytenoid
Lateral
cricoarytenoid
Vocalis and
thyroarytenoid
Direction of pull
Posterior
cricoarytenoid
Fig. 15.6 Intrinsic muscles of the larynx: A, lateral view; 
B, posterior view; C, direction of pull of some intrinsic 
muscles (VP = vocal process of arytenoid).
Muscles that Open or Close the Laryngeal Inlet
1. Oblique arytenoids 
Closes the inlet of larynx.
2. Aryepiglotticus
3. Thyroepiglotticus: opens the inlet of larynx.
Table 15.1 Extrinsic and intrinsic membranes and ligaments 
of the larynx
Extrinsic
Intrinsic
Membranes
• Thyrohyoid
• Cricovocal (conus 
elasticus)
• Cricotracheal
• Quadrate/Quadrangular
Ligaments
• Median and 
lateral thyrohyoid
• Vocal 
• Cricothyroid
• Vestibular
• Cricotracheal
--- Page 239 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
Muscles that Abduct or Adduct the Vocal Cords
1. Posterior cricoarytenoids: abduct the vocal cords.
2. Lateral cricoarytenoids: adduct the vocal cords.
3. Transverse arytenoid: adduct the vocal cords.
Muscles that Increase or Decrease the Tension of 
Vocal Cords
1. Cricothyroid: tenses the vocal cords.
2. Vocalis: tenses the vocal cords.
3. Thyroarytenoid: relaxes the vocal cords.
N.B. All the intrinsic muscles of the larynx are paired except 
transverse arytenoid, which is unpaired.
The origin and insertion of the intrinsic muscles are 
presented in Table 15.2.
The student need not remember the origin and insertion 
of all the intrinsic muscles. However, they should know 
about a few muscles in detail. These are described in 
following text.
Cricothyroid Muscle
It is the only muscle of the larynx, which lies on the external 
surface of the larynx.
It is a small fan-shaped muscle, which arises from the 
anterolateral aspect of the cricoid. After origin, its fibres pass 
backwards and upwards, to be inserted into the inferior 
cornu and adjacent lower border of the lamina of the thyroid 
cartilage. It is supplied by external laryngeal nerve. Its 
contraction makes the thyroid cartilage to tilt slightly 
downwards and forwards at the cricothyroid joints, thereby 
lengthening and tensing the vocal cord (Fig. 15.7). It also helps 
in adduction of vocal cord.
The whole thyroid cartilage can move downwards 
and forwards over the cricoid like the Visor of a knight’s 
helmet (Grant).
Table 15.2 Origin and insertion of muscles of the larynx
Muscle
Origin
Insertion
Cricothyroid (a triangular muscle)
Anterolateral part of the arch of the cricoid 
cartilage
Fibres pass backwards and upwards to 
be inserted into: 
(a) inferior cornu, and 
(b) adjacent part of the lower border 
of lamina of the thyroid cartilage
Oblique arytenoid
Muscular process of one arytenoid cartilage
Apex of opposite arytenoid cartilage
Aryepiglotticus (a slender 
elongated slip of the upper fibres of oblique 
arytenoid, which continue in aryepiglottic fold 
to reach the margin of epiglottis)
Muscular process of arytenoid cartilage
Margin of epiglottis
Transverse arytenoid (rectangular muscle) 
connects the posterior surfaces of two arytenoid 
cartilages
Posterior surface of one arytenoid
Posterior surface of another arytenoid
Lateral cricoarytenoid (a triangular muscle)
Lateral part of upper border of cricoid arch
Front of muscular process of the 
arytenoid cartilage
Posterior cricoarytenoid (a triangular muscle)
Posterior surface of cricoid lamina lateral to 
median ridge
Back of muscular process of the 
arytenoid cartilage
Thyroarytenoid
Posterior aspect of angle of the thyroid 
cartilage
Anterolateral surface of the arytenoid 
cartilage
Thyroepiglotticus (some upper fibres of 
thyroarytenoid curve upwards into aryepiglottic 
fold to reach the margin of epiglottis)
Posterior aspect of angle of the thyroid 
cartilage
Margin of epiglottis
Arytenoid cartilage
Thyroid cartilage
Cricoid cartilage
Lengthening and
tensing of vocal cord
CRICOTHYROID
MUSCLE
Fig. 15.7 Action of the cricothyroid muscle.
--- Page 240 ---
Larynx
The cricothyroid is an important muscle for the tone and 
pitch of the voice. When sound is about to be produced, it 
tenses the vocal cord and makes it ready to vibrate like a 
tuning fork. Hence it is also known as the tuning fork of 
larynx. Paralysis of this muscle following external laryngeal 
nerve lesion alters the voice quite significantly and is 
especially noticeable in singers.
Clinical correlation
Vocalis Muscle
1. It is the detached medial part of the thyroarytenoid and 
lies within the vocal fold just lateral and cranial to the 
vocal ligament. It arises from the thyroid angle and 
anterior part of vocal ligament and inserted into the lateral 
surface of the vocal process (Fig. 15.8). On its contraction 
the anterior part of vocal ligament tenses whereas its 
posterior part is relaxed.
2. It is supplied by the recurrent laryngeal nerve.
3. The segmental tension of vocal ligament helps in the 
modulation of voice like the fingers of a violinist.
Posterior Cricoarytenoid
1. It is a triangular muscle, which arises from the posterior 
surface of the cricoid lamina lateral to its median ridge. 
After origin, the fibres pass upwards and laterally to be 
inserted into the back of the muscular process of the 
arytenoid.
2. It is supplied by recurrent laryngeal nerve.
3. The posterior cricoarytenoid abducts the vocal cords.
Safety muscles of larynx: The posterior cricoarytenoid 
muscles are the only intrinsic muscles of the larynx, which 
abduct the vocal cords to allow entry of air through rima 
glottidis in the respiratory tract below it.
When 
posterior 
cricoarytenoids 
contract, 
muscular 
processes of both the arytenoid cartilages rotate medially. As 
a result, the vocal processes rotate laterally (abducting vocal 
cords) providing wide diamond-shaped opening of the glottis.
If posterior cricoarytenoids are paralyzed, the adductor 
muscles (of vocal cords) take the upper hand and the 
person might die due to lack of air. Hence the posterior 
circoarytenoid muscles are called safety muscles of the 
larynx.
Clinical correlation
Nerve Supply
All the intrinsic muscles of the larynx are supplied by 
recurrent laryngeal nerve except cricothyroid, which is 
supplied by the external laryngeal nerve.
• Damage of external laryngeal nerve: If it is damaged, 
there is some weakness of phonation due to loss of 
tightening effect of cricothyroid muscle on the vocal cords.
• Damage of recurrent laryngeal nerve: It is often 
damaged, accidently during partial thyroidectomy:
(a) If damaged unilaterally, the vocal cord on the 
affected side lies in paramedian position (between 
abduction and adduction) and does not vibrate. But, 
usually the other cord is able to compensate and the 
phonation is not much affected. The sound (normal) 
produced by vocal cords move freely and even cross 
the midline to meet the paralyzed vocal cord;
(b) If damaged bilaterally, both the vocal cords lie in the 
paramedian position with consequent loss of phona-
tion and difficulty in breathing.
• Damage of both recurrent and external laryngeal 
nerves: If the recurrent and external laryngeal nerves are 
involved on both sides, the vocal cords are further 
abducted and fixed due to paralysis of all intrinsic muscles 
of the larynx. This is known as the cadaveric position of 
vocal cords or rima glottidis.
Clinical correlation
N.B.
Exceptions:
• The cricothyroid is the only muscle lying on the outer 
aspect of the larynx.
• All the intrinsic muscles of the larynx are paired except 
transverse arytenoid (interarytenoid), which is unpaired.
• All the intrinsic muscles of larynx adduct the vocal cords 
except posterior cricoarytenoids, which abduct the vocal 
cords.
Fig. 15.8 Origin and insertion of the vocalis muscle.
Quadrangular
membrane
Vocal ligament
Thyroepiglotticus
Aryepiglotticus
Vestibular
ligament
Vocal process of 
arytenoid
Vocalis muscle
Cricovocal
membrane
--- Page 241 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
CAVITY
It extends from inlet of larynx, where it communicates with 
the lumen of laryngopharynx to the lower border of the 
cricoid cartilage, where it is continuous with the lumen of 
the trachea. The anterior wall of laryngeal cavity is longer 
than the posterior wall.
Laryngeal inlet is obliquely placed, sloping downwards 
and backwards. It opens into the laryngopharynx.
Boundaries
Anterior: 
Epiglottis.
Posterior: 
 Interarytenoid fold of the mucous 
membrane.
Lateral (on each side): 
 Aryepiglottic fold of the mucous 
membrane.
Within the laryngeal cavity, two pairs of folds of the 
mucous membrane extend (on each side) posteroanteriorly 
from arytenoid cartilage to the thyroid cartilage:
1. The upper folds are produced by vestibular ligament 
and called vestibular folds or false vocal cords. The 
space between vestibular folds is called rima vestibuli.
When the vestibular folds come together, they prevent 
food and liquids from entering the larynx and air from 
leaving the lungs, as when a person holds his breath.
2. The lower folds are produced by the vocal ligaments 
and vocalis muscle, and called vocal folds or true vocal 
cords. They extend from the middle of the thyroid 
angle to the vocal processes of arytenoids. The space 
between the right and left vocal folds is called rima 
glottidis. The rima glottidis is the narrowest part of the 
laryngeal cavity.
Laryngeal obstruction: The mucous membrane of the 
superior part of larynx is very sensitive. When foreign body (a 
piece of food or a drop of water etc.) enters into the laryngeal 
inlet it causes immediate explosive coughing and the foreign 
body is expelled out. If this reflex is slowed or absent as in 
neurological lesion or after consuming alcohol, a foreign body 
(e.g., piece of meat) may enter the laryngeal cavity and cause 
choking (i.e., laryngeal obstruction). Choking by food is a 
common cause of laryngeal obstruction and asphyxia. If 
foreign body is not dislodged and expelled out immediately by 
Heimlich maneuver, person will die within minutes, almost 
certainly before there is time to take him to the hospital. The 
Heimlich maneuver is performed as follows (Fig. 15.9):
Stand behind the victim, pass your arms under his arms, 
place hands in front of the victim’s epigastrium with one hand 
formed into a fist and the other hand lying over it. Now give 3 
or 4 abdominal thrusts directed upwards and backwards. By 
doing this, the residual air in the lungs is squeezed up in 
trachea and larynx with force, dislodging foreign body and 
thus relieving laryngeal obstruction (choking). The foreign 
body is either expelled itself or removed.
Clinical correlation
SUBDIVISIONS OF THE LARYNGEAL CAVITY
The laryngeal cavity is divided into three parts by two pairs 
of vestibular and vocal folds (Fig. 15.10), viz.
1. Vestibule (supraglottic compartment): It extends from 
laryngeal inlet to the vestibular folds.
Its anterior wall is formed by the mucous membrane 
covering the posterior surface of epiglottis, posterior 
wall by the mucous membrane covering the apices of 
arytenoids cartilages, and corniculate cartilages, and 
sides by aryepiglottic folds.
Fig. 15.9 Heimlich maneuver. Figure in the inset shows the 
position of hands in the epigastric region of the victim.
Hyoid bone
Rima
vestibuli
Rima glottidis
Cricoid cartilage
Aryepiglottic fold
Laryngeal inlet
Piriform fossa
Thyrohyoid
membrane
Quadrangular
membrane
Vestibular ligament
Saccule
Lamina of 
thyroid cartilage
Vocal ligament
Cricovocal
membrane
(conus elasticus)
Fig. 15.10 Coronal section of the laryngeal cavity showing 
its subdivisions. A = vestibule, B = ventricle of the larynx, 
C = infraglottic compartment.
--- Page 242 ---
Larynx
The aryepiglottic folds separate the vestibule from 
piriform recesses.
2. Ventricle or sinus of the larynx (glottic compartment):
It is the deep elliptical space between vestibular and vocal 
folds. On each side, a narrow blind diverticulum of the 
mucous membrane extends posterosuperiorly between 
the vestibular fold and lamina of the thyroid cartilage, 
called saccule of the larynx. It is provided with the 
mucous glands, whose secretions lubricate the vocal 
cords. Hence it is also termed oil can of the larynx.
Laryngocele: If air pressure in the laryngeal sinus is raised 
too much as in trumpet players, glass blowers or weight 
lifters, the saccule dilates to produce an air-filled cystic 
swelling called laryngocele (Fig. 15.11). The laryngocele 
may be internal, when it is located within the larynx or 
external, when distended saccule herniates through the 
thyrohyoid membrane and comes outside the larynx.
Clinical correlation
3. Infraglottic compartment: It extends from vocal folds to 
the lower border of the cricoid cartilage.
MUCOUS MEMBRANE
The mucous membrane of the larynx is loosely attached, 
except over the posterior surface of the epiglottis, true vocal 
cords, corniculate and cuneiform cartilages where it is firmly 
adherent.
The whole of the laryngeal cavity is lined by ciliated 
columnar epithelium except the anterior surface and upper 
half of the posterior surface of the epiglottis, upper parts of 
aryepiglottic folds and vocal folds, which are lined by strati-
fied squamous epithelium.
The mucous glands are distributed all over the mucous 
lining. They are particularly numerous on the posterior 
surface of the epiglottis, posterior parts of aryepiglottic folds 
and in the saccules. There are no mucous glands in the vocal 
folds.
The mucosa (lined by stratified squamous epithelium) lining 
the vocal cords is firmly adhered to the vocal ligaments and 
there is no intervening submucosa. This accounts for the 
pearly white avascular appearance of vocal cords. The 
edema of larynx does not involve the true vocal cords since 
there is no submucous tissue.
Clinical correlation
NERVE SUPPLY OF THE LARYNX
Motor nerve supply: It is provided by internal and external 
laryngeal nerves.
Sensory nerve supply: The mucous membrane of larynx 
above the vocal folds is supplied by the internal laryngeal 
nerve, while below the vocal folds by the recurrent laryngeal 
nerve.
If internal laryngeal nerve is damaged, there is anesthesia 
of the mucous membrane in the supraglottic portion and 
loss of protective cough reflex. As a result, the foreign bodies 
can readily enter the larynx.
Clinical correlation
ARTERIAL SUPPLY OF THE LARYNX
The arterial supply of larynx is as follows:
1. Above the vocal fold by superior laryngeal artery, a branch 
of superior thyroid artery.
2. Below the vocal fold by inferior laryngeal artery, a branch 
of inferior thyroid artery.
N.B. Rima glottidis has dual blood supply (vide supra).
VENOUS DRAINAGE OF THE LARYNX
The veins draining the larynx accompany the arteries. These 
are:
1. Superior laryngeal vein, which drains into the superior 
thyroid vein.
2. Inferior laryngeal vein, which drains into the inferior 
thyroid vein.
LYMPHATIC DRAINAGE OF THE LARYNX
The lymphatics from:
(a) above the vocal cords pierce the thyrohyoid membrane, 
run along superior thyroid vessels and drain into upper 
deep cervical lymph nodes (anterosuperior group).
Fig. 15.11 Laryngocele.
Normal
saccule
External
laryngocele
Hyoid bone
Internal
laryngocele
Thyrohyoid
membrane
Cricothyroid
membrane
Cricoid cartilage
Thyroid cartilage
--- Page 243 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
(b) below the vocal cords pierce the cricothyroid membrane 
and go to the prelaryngeal and pretracheal nodes, and 
then drain into lower deep cervical lymph nodes 
(posteroinferior group).
RIMA GLOTTIDIS AND PHONATION
It is the narrowest anteroposterior cleft of the laryngeal cavity. 
The anteroposterior diameter of glottis is 24 mm in adult 
males and 16 mm in adult females.
Boundaries
In front: 
Angle of thyroid cartilage.
Behind: 
Interarytenoid folds of the mucous membrane.
On each side: Vocal fold in anterior three-fifth and vocal 
process of arytenoid cartilage in the posterior 
two-fifth.
Subdivisions of Rima Glottidis
The rima glottidis is divided into the following two parts:
1. Intermembranous part in the anterior three-fifth, 
between the vocal cords.
2. Intercartilaginous part in the posterior one-fifth, between 
the vocal processes of arytenoid cartilage.
Shape of Rima Glottidis (Fig. 15.12)
The size and shape of glottis varies with the movements of 
the vocal cords:
 In quiet breathing, the intermembranous part is 
triangular and intercartilaginous part is rectangular. As a 
whole the glottis is pentagonal.
 In full inspiration, the glottis widens and becomes 
diamond shaped due to abduction of vocal cords.
 During high-pitched voice, the rima glottidis is
reduced to a linear chink, due to adduction of both 
intermembranous and intercartilaginous parts.
 During whispering, the intermembranous part is highly 
adducted and intercartilaginous part is separated by 
triangular gap, thus rendering an inverted funnel shape to 
the rima glottidis.
Laryngoscopy: The interior of the larynx can be inspected 
directly by laryngoscope (direct laryngoscopy), or indirectly 
through a laryngeal mirror (indirect laryngoscopy). The 
following structures are viewed (Fig. 15.13):
• Base of tongue.
• Valleculae.
• Epiglottis.
• Aryepiglottic folds.
• Piriform fossae.
• False vocal cords (red and widely apart).
• True vocal cords (pearly white), medial to false vocal cords.
• Sinus of the larynx between false and true vocal cords.
Clinical correlation
MECHANISM OF PHONATION
The phonation (speech) is produced by the vibrations of the 
vocal cords. The greater the amplitude of vibration, the 
louder is the sound.
The larynx is like a wind instrument. The voice is 
produced in following manner:
1. Vocal cords are kept adducted.
2. Infraglottic air pressure is generated by the exhaled air 
from lungs by the contraction of abdominal, intercostal, 
and other expiratory muscles.
3. Force of air opens the cords and is released as small 
puffs.
4. As the moving air passes through the vocal cords it 
makes them to vibrate producing sound.
5. Sound is amplified by mouth, pharynx, esophagus, and 
nose.
6. Sound is converted into speech by the modulatory 
actions of lips, tongue, palate, pharynx, and teeth.
During quiet respiration
(pentagonal)
During high-pitched voice
(linear chink)
During inspiration
(diamond shaped)
During whispering
(funnel shaped)
Fig. 15.12 Variations in the size and shape of rima glottidis 
during different movements of the vocal cords.
--- Page 244 ---
Larynx
N.B.
• The vowels are voiced in the larynx due to vibration of 
vocal folds whereas consonants are produced by the 
intrinsic muscles of the tongue.
• The loudness of sound depends upon the amplitude of 
vibrating vocal folds, whereas pitch depends upon the 
frequency with which the vocal folds vibrate. Since the 
vocal cords are usually longer in males than females, they 
vibrate with greater amplitude but with lower frequency. 
Hence voice of male is louder but low pitched.
Fig. 15.14 Vocal nodules.
Fig. 15.13 Laryngoscopic view of the laryngeal cavity during moderate respiration. Note that rima glottidis is widely open. 
A, schematic diagram; B, actual photographs. (Source: Fig. 8.208B, Page 956, Gray's Anatomy for Students, Richard L Drake, 
Wayne Vogl, Adam WM Mitchell, Copyright Elsevier Inc. 2005, All rights reserved.)
Vestibular fold
Vocal fold
Rima glottidis
Tracheal rings
Base of tongue
Median
glossoepiglottic fold
Epiglottis
Aryepiglottic fold
Cuneiform
cartilage
Corniculate
cartilage
Vallecula
Sinus of
larynx
Epiglottis
Vocal cords
Vocal nodules
Aryepiglottic fold
symmetrical, and vary in size from that of pin head to a split 
pea. In early stages, they are soft, reddish, and edematous 
but later become greyish or whitish in color (Fig. 15.14).
Vocal nodules (Singer’s or Screamer’s nodules): During 
vibration the area of maximum contact between the vocal 
cords is at the junction of their anterior one-third and 
posterior two-third and thus subject to maximum friction. 
Hence in individuals, who overuse their voice, such as 
teachers, pop singers, the inflammatory nodules develop at 
these sites called vocal nodules. They are bilateral and 
Clinical correlation
Anterior
Tongue
Epiglottis
Aryepiglottic fold
Cuneiform tubercle
Corniculate tubercle
Posterior
Rima glottidis
(opening between
vocal cords)
Vestibular fold
(false vocal fold)
Vocal fold
(true vocal cord)
Leryngeal inlet
Vestibule
Piriform recess
Laryngopharynx
(closed)
--- Page 245 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
Golden Facts to Remember
  Largest and most prominent cartilage of the larynx
Thyroid cartilage
  Cartilage, which completely encircles the lumen of 
larynx
Cricoid cartilage
  Foundation stone of the larynx
Cricoid cartilage
  All the intrinsic muscles of the larynx are paired 
except
Transverse arytenoid (interarytenoid)
  All the intrinsic muscles of the larynx are 
adductors of the vocal cords except
Posterior cricoarytenoids, which are abductors of 
the vocal cords
  Tuning fork of larynx (chief tensor of vocal cords)
Cricothyroid
  Modulators of voice
Vocalis muscles
  All the intrinsic muscles of the larynx are supplied 
by recurrent laryngeal nerve except
Cricothyroid, which is supplied by the external 
laryngeal nerve
  Narrowest region of the laryngeal cavity
Rima glottidis
  Safety muscles of the larynx
Posterior cricoarytenoid
  Singer’s nodules
Inflammatory nodules on the vocal cords at the 
junction of anterior one-third and posterior two-third
  Commonest cancer of the larynx
Squamous cell carcinoma (90–95%)
  Commonest site of the laryngeal cancer
Glottic region
  Most common congenital abnormality of the 
larynx
Laryngomalacia (excessive flaccidity of supraglottic 
larynx)
  Reinke’s space
Potential space under the epithelium of vocal cord
A senior army officer along with his son, daughter, 
and wife went to a 5-star hotel to have dinner to 
celebrate the birthday of his wife. The officer 
consumed 3 or 4 pegs of alcohol before taking the 
meal. While having meals he began to suffocate and 
collapsed on the floor. The wife who was sitting by his 
side suspected that probably he has consumed too 
much alcohol. On close examination, his son who was 
a final year MBBS student, found that pulse was strong 
and face began to turn blue (cyanosis). He realized 
that his daddy was suffering from asphyxia. So he 
immediately opened his mouth and observed that a 
piece of meat was caught in the posterior part of the 
pharynx. He inserted his index finger and tried to take 
out the piece of meat. On being unsuccessful he rolled 
his daddy into a prone position and with his hands 
interlocked against the epigastrium exerted pressure 
on abdomen 2 or 3 times. He was happy that the piece 
of meat expelled out.
Questions
1. Where was the piece of meat most likely lodged?
2. Why is choking and asphyxia common in people 
who consume alcohol before meals?
3. What is Heimlich maneuver?
4. Which is narrowest part of the laryngeal cavity?
Answers
1. In the inlet of the larynx
2. Because of the following two reasons:
(a) People who are drunk are less able to chew 
their food properly and to detect a large bite.
(b) In a person who consumes alcohol, the protective 
explosive cough reflex when a foreign material 
enters the laryngeal cavity markedly reduces.
3. It is a first-aid procedure by which foreign bodies 
lodged in the respiratory tract are dislodged and 
expelled out (for details see page 226).
4. Glottis.
Clinical Case Study
--- Page 246 ---
Blood Supply and 
Lymphatic Drainage 
of the Head and Neck
CHAPTER
BLOOD SUPPLY OF HEAD AND NECK
The blood supply of head and neck consists of an arterial 
supply and venous drainage and carried out by the arteries 
and veins, respectively. The medical students must know the 
location of larger blood vessels of the head and neck because 
these vessels may become compromised due to disease process 
or during surgical procedures. The blood vessels also spread 
infection to head and neck. Further, they may also spread 
cancer cells from a malignant tumor to distant sites 
(metastasis) and at a faster rate than lymph vessels. The blood 
vessels are less numerous than lymph vessels yet the veins 
usually parallel the lymph vessels.
ARTERIAL SUPPLY
The arteries that supply the head and neck are subclavian 
and common carotid arteries (Fig. 16.1). The main arteries 
of the head and neck are right and left common carotid 
arteries, each of which divides into (a) an external carotid 
artery and (b) an internal carotid artery. The external carotid 
artery supplies structures external to the head and greater 
part of the neck. The internal carotid artery supplies 
structures within the cranial cavity and the orbit. The 
common carotid, external carotid, and internal carotid 
together form the carotid system of arteries. The carotid 
system of arteries forms the major source of arterial blood 
supply to the head and neck.
SUBCLAVIAN ARTERIES
The subclavian artery is so called because it is located 
beneath the clavicle. It is the main source of blood supply 
to the upper limb and hence called artery of the upper 
limb. However, the subclavian artery also supplies 
considerable part of the thoracic wall, head, neck, and brain 
through its branches. 
Origin (Fig. 16.2)
1. The 
right 
subclavian 
artery 
arises 
from 
brachiocephalic trunk behind the right sternoclavicular 
joint at the root of neck.
2. The left subclavian artery arises from the arch of aorta in 
the thorax. It runs upwards on the left mediastinal pleura 
and makes groove on the left lung and enters the neck by 
passing behind the left sternoclavicular joint.
N.B. Based on their origin, the right subclavian artery has 
only cervical part whereas the left subclavian artery has 
thoracic as well as cervical parts. The cervical part extends 
from sternoclavicular joint to the outer border of the first rib.
Course (Fig. 16.3)
In the neck, both the arteries pursue a similar course.
On each side, the subclavian artery arches laterally across 
the anterior surface of the cervical pleura onto the first rib 
posterior to the scalenus anterior muscle. At the outer border 
of 1st rib, it ends by becoming axillary artery.
Fig. 16.1 Arteries supplying the head and neck.
Left external
carotid artery
Left internal
carotid artery
Arch of aorta
Brachiocephalic
trunk
Right subclavian
artery
Right common
carotid artery
Left common
carotid artery
Left subclavian
artery
--- Page 247 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
3. Third part—extends from the lateral border of scalenus 
anterior to the outer border of the first rib.
Relations (Fig. 16.4)
The relations of the three parts of subclavian artery are as 
follows:
First part
Anterior:
1. The common carotid artery, internal jugular vein, vagus 
nerve, vertebral vein, phrenic nerve, sternocleidomastoid, 
sternothyroid, and sternohyoid muscles.
Left subclavian artery
Left common carotid artery
Right common carotid artery
Right subclavian artery
Brachiocephalic trunk
Arch of
aorta
Fig. 16.2 Origin of the subclavian arteries. Note that the 
right subclavian artery arises from the brachiocephalic trunk 
whereas the left subclavian artery arises directly from the 
arch of aorta.
Fig. 16.3 Parts of the subclavian artery.
First rib
Scalenus
anterior muscle
Axillary artery
First part
Third part
Second part
(behind the muscle)
Investing layer of
deep cervical fascia
Subclavian vein
Prevertebral fascia
Suprascapular
and transverse
cervical arteries
Scalenus anterior
Subclavian artery
Lower trunk of
brachial plexus
Scalenus
medius
Phrenic
nerve
Apex
of lung
Suprapleural membrane
Ansa subclavia
Vertebral vein
Vagus nerve
Common carotid artery
Internal jugular vein
Sternothyroid
Anterior jugular vein
Sternocleidomastoid
Platysma
Skin
Sternohyoid
Cervical pleura
Suprascapular and
transverse cervical veins
Termination
At the outer border of first rib where the subclavian artery 
continues as the axillary artery.
Parts
On each side, the subclavian artery is divided into three 
parts by the scalenus anterior muscle (Fig. 16.3). These are:
1. First part—extends from origin to medial border of 
scalenus anterior.
2. Second part—lies behind the scalenus anterior muscle.
Fig. 16.4 Schematic diagram to show the relations of right subclavian artery.
--- Page 248 ---
Blood Supply and Lymphatic Drainage of the Head and Neck
2. Thoracic duct (only on the left side), cardiac branches of 
the vagus and sympathetic trunk; and ansa cervicalis 
(encircling the subclavian artery), and phrenic nerve on 
the left side only.
Posterior:
1. Apex of the lung covered by the cervical pleura and 
suprapleural membrane.
2. Sympathetic trunk and right recurrent laryngeal nerve, 
which hooks the undersurface of the right subclavian 
artery.
Second part
Anterior:
1. Scalenus anterior muscle.
2. Phrenic nerve (on right side only).
3. Sternocleidomastoid.
Behind:
1. Apex of lung covered by the cervical pleura and 
suprapleural membrane.
2. Lower trunk of the brachial plexus and scalenus medius 
muscle.
Third part
Anterior:
1. Suprascapular and transverse cervical vessels.
2. Subclavian and external jugular veins.
3. Anterior jugular vein.
Behind:
1. Apex of lung covered by the cervical pleura and 
suprapleural membrane.
2. Lower trunk of the brachial plexus and scalenus medius 
muscle.
N.B. The second part forms the summit of the arch of the 
subclavian artery and rises 1.5–2.5 cm above the level of the 
clavicle. It emerges through the gap between scalenus 
anterior and scalenus medius muscle along with lower trunk 
of the brachial plexus.
Approach to subclavian artery: The third part of the 
subclavian artery is most superficial, and its pulsations can 
be felt on deep pressure. It is located mostly in the 
supraclavicular triangle, where it lies on the first rib. It can be 
compressed against the first rib by pressing downwards, 
backwards, and medially in the angle between the clavicle 
and posterior border of the sternocleidomastoid muscle. It 
can also be ligated conventionally at this site. The blood 
supply to the upper limb is not hampered due to adequate 
collateral circulation.
Clinical correlation
Branches of the Subclavian Artery (Fig. 16.5)
The subclavian artery usually gives off four branches. All of 
them arise from first part with the exception of costocervical 
trunk, which on the right side arises from the second part.
 From the first part:
1. Vertebral artery 
2. Thyrocervical trunk – Inferior thyroid artery
 
 
– Transverse cervical artery
 
 
– Suprascapular artery
3. Internal thoracic artery 
4. Costocervical trunk (on left side only)
Suprascapular artery
Dorsal scapular
artery
Dorsal scapular
artery
Internal
thoracic
artery
Thyrocervical trunk
Vertebral
arteries
Scalenus anterior
muscle
Inferior thyroid artery
Transverse cervical
artery
Thyrocervical trunk
Costocervical trunk (right)
Costocervical trunk (left)
Fig. 16.5 Branches of the right and left subclavian arteries.
--- Page 249 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
 From the second part:
Costocervical trunk (on right side only)
 From the third part:
Dorsal scapula artery: It is an occasional branch that may 
arise from the third part of the subclavian artery. When 
present, it replaces the deep branch of the transverse 
cervical artery. 
Vertebral Artery
The vertebral artery is one of the principal arteries which 
supplies the brain.
It is the first and largest branch of the first part of the 
subclavian artery (Fig. 16.6).
Origin, Course, and Termination
The vertebral artery arises from the upper aspect of the first 
part of the subclavian artery, runs vertically upwards to enter 
the foramen transversarium of the transverse process of C6. 
Then it passes through the foramen transversaria of the upper 
six cervical vertebrae.
After emerging from the foramen transversarium of C1, it 
winds backwards around the lateral mass of the atlas and 
enters the cranial cavity through foramen magnum.
In the cranial cavity, it unites with the vertebral artery of 
the opposite side at the lower border of the pons to form the 
basilar artery.
Parts (Fig. 16.6)
The vertebral artery is divided into four parts, viz.
1. First (cervical) part—extends from origin to foramen 
transversarium of C6 vertebra. This part lies in the 
scalenovertebral triangle.
2. Second (vertebral) part—lies within the foramen 
transversaria of upper six cervical vertebrae.
3. Third (suboccipital) part—extends from foramen 
transversarium of C1 vertebra to the foramen magnum 
of skull. This part lies within the suboccipital triangle.
4. Fourth (intracranial) part—extends from foramen 
magnum to the lower border of the pons.
Branches
In the neck (cervical branches)
1. Spinal branches: They arise from the second (vertebral) 
part and enter the vertebral canal through intervertebral 
foramina to supply the upper five or six cervical segments 
of the spinal cord.
2. Muscular branches: They arise from the first and third 
parts of the vertebral artery. Those from the first part, 
supply deep muscles of the neck and those from the 
third part, supply the muscles of the suboccipital triangle.
In the cranial cavity (cranial branches)
They arise from the 4th part. These are:
1. Meningeal branches.
2. Posterior spinal artery.
3. Anterior spinal artery.
4. Posterior inferior cerebellar artery.
5. Medullary branches.
Subclavian steal syndrome (Fig. 16.7): If there is 
obstruction of the subclavian artery proximal to the origin of 
vertebral artery, some amount of blood from opposite 
vertebral artery will pass in a retrograde fashion to the 
subclavian artery of the affected side through the vertebral 
artery of that side to provide the collateral circulation to the 
upper limb on the side of lesion. Thus there occurs a sort of 
stealing of blood of brain by the subclavian artery of the 
affected side. Hence, the name subclavian steal syndrome.
Clinical correlation
Internal Thoracic Artery (Internal Mammary Artery)
The internal mammary artery arises from the inferior aspect 
of the first part of the subclavian artery opposite the origin 
of thyrocervical trunk. It passes downwards and medially in 
Fig. 16.6 Course and parts of the vertebral artery.
Basilar artery
Fourth part of
vertebral artery
Foramen magnum
Third part of
vertebral artery
Transverse
process of atlas
Transverse
process of C6
Second part of
vertebral artery
Scalenus anterior
 muscle
First part of
vertebral artery
Subclavian
artery
--- Page 250 ---
Blood Supply and Lymphatic Drainage of the Head and Neck
front of the cupola of the cervical pleura and enters the 
thorax behind the sternoclavicular joint.
In the thorax, it passes vertically downwards, about 
1.25 cm away from the lateral border of the sternum, up to 
the level of the 6th intercostal space, where it divides into 
two terminal branches: musculophrenic and superior 
epigastric arteries (for details see Textbook of Anatomy:
Upper Limb and Thorax, Vol. I by Vishram Singh).
Thyrocervical Trunk
It is the short, wide branch of the subclavian artery.
Origin, Course, and Termination
The thyrocervical trunk arises from the upper aspect of the 
first part of the subclavian artery at the medial margin of 
the scalenus anterior and lateral to the origin of vertebral 
artery. It immediately terminates into three branches.
Branches (Fig. 16.5)
These are:
1. Inferior thyroid artery.
2. Superficial cervical artery.
3. Suprascapular artery.
Inferior thyroid artery: It ascends along the medial border 
of scalenus anterior and just below transverse process of C7 
vertebra, it turns medially in front of the vertebral artery 
and posterior to vagus nerve, sympathetic trunk, and 
common carotid artery to reach the posterior surface of the 
lateral lobe of the thyroid gland. Then it descends to the 
lower pole of the thyroid lobe and divides into ascending 
and descending glandular branches.
Other small branches:
In addition to glandular branches to thyroid gland it also 
gives the following branches:
1. Ascending cervical artery passes upwards in front of the 
transverse processes of cervical vertebrae along the medial 
side of the phrenic nerve and acts as a guide to this nerve. 
It supplies prevertebral muscles and sends spinal 
branches to the vertebral canal along the spinal nerves.
2. Inferior laryngeal artery accompanies the recurrent 
laryngeal nerve to the larynx and supplies the mucous 
membrane of the larynx below the vocal cord and muscles 
of the larynx.
3. Tracheal, pharyngeal, and esophageal branches to trachea, 
pharynx, and esophagus, respectively.
Transverse cervical artery: It passes laterally and upwards 
across the scalenus anterior to reach the posterior triangle, 
where it lies in front of the trunks of the brachial plexus. 
Here, it further divides into superficial and deep branches. 
The superficial branches ascend beneath the trapezius and 
anastomoses with the superficial division of the descending 
branch of the occipital artery.
The deep branch courses deep to the levator scapulae 
and takes past in the scapular anastomosis. 
Suprascapular artery: It passes laterally across the scalenus 
anterior to lie in front of the third part of the subclavian 
artery and of brachial plexus. Now it passes behind the 
clavicle to reach the suprascapular notch of the scapula, 
where it passes above the suprascapular ligament to enter 
the suprascapular fossa and takes part in the formation of 
arterial anastomosis around the scapula.
Costocervical Trunk (Fig. 16.8)
Origin
It arises from posterior aspects of: (a) first part of the 
subclavian artery on the left side, and (b) second part of the 
subclavian artery on the right side.
Course and Termination
The artery arches backwards above the cupola of the pleura 
and on reaching the neck of the first rib it terminates by 
dividing into ascending deep cervical artery and ascending 
superior (highest) intercostal artery.
Deep cervical artery passes backwards between the 
transverse process of C7 vertebra and neck of the first rib. It 
then ascends between the semispinalis capitis and 
semispinalis cervicis and anastomoses with the deep division 
of the descending branch of the occipital artery.
Superior (highest) intercostal artery descends in front of 
the neck of the first two ribs and gives rise to posterior 
intercostal arteries to the first two intercostal spaces.
Fig. 16.7 Subclavian steal syndrome.
Thrombus
Arch of
aorta
Left vertebral artery
Basilar artery
To brain
Left subclavian artery
Right vertebral
artery
Right subclavian
artery
--- Page 251 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
Dorsal Scapular Artery
It arises from the third part of the subclavian artery 
(but may be the deep branch of the transverse cervical 
artery). As a direct branch of the subclavian artery, it 
passes laterally and backwards between the trunks of 
brachial plexus to reach underneath the levator scapulae. 
Now it descends along the medial border of the scapula in 
company with dorsal scapular nerve deep to rhomboids 
and takes part in the formation of arterial anastomosis 
around the scapula.
The branches of subclavian artery and their subsequent 
branches are summarized in Table 16.1.
• Cervical rib may compress the subclavian artery as it 
passes through the gap between the scalenus anterior 
and scalenus medius muscles. This can be tested clinically 
when the patient’s chin is turned upwards and to the 
affected side after a deep breath the radial pulse is 
diminished or obliterated (Adson’s test).
• Aneurysm may develop in the third part of subclavian 
artery. The pressure due to aneurysm on the brachial plexus 
causes numbness, weakness, and pain in the upper limb.
• Dysphagia 
lusoria: 
right 
subclavian 
artery 
sometimes may arise from descending thoracic aorta and 
compress esophagus leading to difficulty in swallowing. 
This condition is called dysphagia lusoria.
Clinical correlation
Fig. 16.8 Origin, course, and branches of the costocervical trunk.
Vertebral artery
Subclavian artery
Internal thoracic artery
Cervical pleura
Apex of lung
Deep cervical artery
Transverse process
of C7 vertebra
Superior (highest)
intercostal artery
Neck of first rib
First posterior
intercostal artery
Second rib
Second posterior
intercostal artery
Costocervical
trunk
Thyrocervical trunk
Table 16.1 Summary of branches of the subclavian artery and their subsequent branches
Branches 
Subsequent branches
Vertebral artery
• First (cervical) part
• Second (vertebral) part
• Third (suboccipital) part
• Fourth (intracranial) part
Muscular branches
Spinal branches
Muscular branches
Meningeal branches
Posterior spinal artery
Posterior inferior cerebellar artery
Medullary branches
Internal thoracic artery
(See Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax, Vol. I by Vishram Singh)
Thyrocervical trunk
• Inferior thyroid artery
• Suprascapular artery
• Transverse cervical artery
Glandular branches
Ascending cervical artery
Inferior laryngeal artery
Tracheal, pharyngeal, and esophageal branches
(See Textbook of Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax, Vol. I by Vishram Singh)
Superficial branch
Deep branch/dorsal scapular artery
Costocervical trunk
Deep cervical artery
Highest intercostal artery
--- Page 252 ---
Blood Supply and Lymphatic Drainage of the Head and Neck
COMMON CAROTID ARTERIES
There are two common carotid arteries: right and left. They 
are the chief arteries of the head and neck.
Origin (Fig. 16.1)
The right common carotid artery arises in neck from 
brachiocephalic trunk (innominate artery) behind the 
sternoclavicular joint.
The left common carotid artery arises in thorax (superior 
mediastinum) directly from the arch of aorta. It ascends to 
the back of left sternoclavicular joint and enters the neck.
Course, Termination, and Relations
In the neck, both arteries (right and left) have similar course. 
Each artery runs upwards from sternoclavicular joint to the 
upper border of the lamina of thyroid cartilage (opposite the 
disc between the 3rd and 4th cervical vertebrae), where it 
terminates by dividing into internal and external carotid 
arteries. The internal carotid artery is considered as a 
continuation of common carotid artery. They are named as 
internal and external because the former supplies structures 
within the skull and latter supplies structures outside the skull.
Each common carotid artery lies in front of transverse 
processes of lower four cervical vertebrae under the cover of 
anterior border of the sternocleidomastoid muscle.
Branches
The common carotid artery gives only two terminal branches, 
i.e., external and internal carotid arteries.
Carotid pulse: The common carotid artery can be 
compressed against the prominent anterior tubercle of 
transverse process of the 6th cervical vertebrae called 
carotid tubercle (Chassaignac’s tubercle) by pressing 
medially and posteriorly with the thumb. The carotid tubercle 
of the 6th cervical vertebra is located about 4 cm above the 
sternoclavicular joint at the level of cricoid cartilage. 
Above this level, the common carotid artery is superficial 
and hence its pulsations can be easily felt. The carotid pulse 
is the most constant pulse in the body.
Clinical correlation
External Carotid Artery (Fig. 16.9)
It is one of the two terminal branches of the common carotid 
artery and supplies the structures external to the head and in 
front of the neck.
Course and Relations
The external carotid artery extends upwards from the level of 
upper border of the lamina of the thyroid cartilage to a point 
behind the neck of the mandible, where it terminates in the 
substance of the parotid gland by dividing into the superficial 
temporal and maxillary arteries.
Fig. 16.9 Curved course of the external carotid artery. Note 
the relationship of the external carotid with the internal 
carotid arteries.
External
carotid artery
Internal
carotid artery
Common
carotid artery
Maxillary
artery
Superficial
temporal artery
External carotid artery
Terminal branches
Posterior
auricular
artery
Occipital
artery
Ascending
pharyngeal artery
(Medial branch)
Posterior branches
Internal carotid
artery
Common carotid
artery
Facial
artery
Lingual
artery
Superior thyroid
artery
Anterior branches
Fig. 16.10 Branches of the external carotid artery.
The external carotid artery has a slightly curved course so 
that it is anteromedial to the internal carotid artery in its 
lower part and anterolateral to the internal carotid artery in 
its upper part (Fig. 16.9).
--- Page 253 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
laryngeal nerve to reach the upper pole of the thyroid 
gland, which it supplies.
Branches (Fig. 16.11)
(a) Infrahyoid branch, which anastomoses with its fellow of 
opposite side.
(b) Sternomastoid branch to the sternomastoid muscle.
(c) Superior laryngeal artery accompanies the internal 
laryngeal nerve, passes deep to the thyrohyoid muscle 
and pierces the thyrohyoid membrane to supply the 
larynx.
(d) Cricothyroid branch, passes across the cricothyroid 
ligament and anastomoses with its counterpart of the 
opposite side.
(e) Glandular branches to the thyroid gland; one of which 
anastomoses with its fellow of the opposite side along 
the upper border of the isthmus of the thyroid gland.
Lingual artery: It arises from the front of the external 
carotid artery opposite the tip of the greater cornu of the 
hyoid bone. It is the main artery to supply blood to the 
tongue. It may arise in common with the facial artery 
(linguofacial trunk).
Deep temporal artery
Zygomatico-orbital branch
Transverse facial artery
Superior labial artery
Dorsal nasal artery
Lateral nasal branch
Maxillary
Inferior labial artery
Sublingual artery
Suprahyoid artery
Cricothyroid branch
Glandular branches
Infrahyoid artery
Submental artery
Dorsal lingual arteries
Superior laryngeal artery
Sternomastoid branch
Deep cervical artery
Superficial branch of
transverse cervical artery
Semispinalis capitis
Descending branch
Mastoid branch
Occipital branch
Sternomastoid
branches
Ascending
pharyngeal artery
Stylomastoid artery
Anterior
auricular branch
Superficial temporal
Anterior
branch
Posterior branch
Branches (Fig. 16.10)
The external carotid artery gives rise to eight branches as 
follows:
1. Superior thyroid artery. 
2. Lingual artery.
3. Facial artery.
4. Occipital artery.
5. Posterior auricular artery.
6. Ascending pharyngeal artery.
7. Maxillary artery.
8. Superficial temporal artery.
The first three arteries arise from anterior aspect, next two 
from posterior aspect, and next one from medial aspect. The 
last two are terminal branches.
The branches of the external carotid artery are eight in 
number (Mnemonic – the term EXTERNAL consists of 8 
letters: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, which correspond to the number of 
branches of the external carotid artery).
1. Superior thyroid artery: It arises from the front of 
external carotid artery just below the tip of the greater 
cornu of the hyoid bone. It runs downwards and 
forwards, parallel and superficial to the external 
Fig. 16.11 Distribution of the branches of the external carotid artery (shown in dark red color) (F = facial artery, L = lingual 
artery, AP = ascending palatine artery, OC = occipital artery, PA = posterior auricular artery).
--- Page 254 ---
Blood Supply and Lymphatic Drainage of the Head and Neck
It is divided into three parts by the hyoglossus 
muscle, viz.
(a) First part lies in the carotid triangle and forms a 
characteristic loop with convexity upwards above 
the greater cornu. The loop is crossed superficially 
by the hypoglossal nerve. The loop permits free 
movement of the hyoid bone.
(b) Second part lies deep to the hyoglossus muscle along 
the upper border of the hyoid bone.
(c) Third part (also called arteria profunda linguae) or 
deep lingual artery first runs upwards along the 
anterior border of the hyoglossus muscle and then 
forwards on the undersurface of the tongue, where 
it anastomoses with its fellow of opposite side.
Branches
(a) From first part—suprahyoid branch. It anastomoses with 
its fellow of opposite side.
(b) From second part—dorsal linguae branches usually two 
in number, to the dorsum of tongue and tonsil.
(c) From third part—sublingual artery, to the sublingual 
gland.
3. Facial artery (formerly called external maxillary 
artery): It arises from the front of the external carotid 
artery just above the tip of the greater cornu of the 
hyoid bone.
It is divided into two parts—cervical and facial:
(a) Cervical part of the facial artery ascends deep to the 
digastric and stylohyoid muscles, passes deep to the 
ramus of mandible where it grooves the posterior 
border of the submandibular gland. Then it makes 
S-shaped bend, first bending down (with convexity 
upwards) over the submandibular gland, and then 
up (with convexity downwards) over the base of the 
mandible.
(b) Facial part of the facial artery begins where the facial 
artery winds around the lower border of the body of 
the mandible at the anteroinferior angle of the 
masseter. (It has already been described on page 63).
Branches
From the cervical part (branches in the neck)
(a) Ascending palatine artery arises near the origin of facial 
artery, ascends, and accompanies the levator palati, passes 
over the upper border of the superior constrictor and 
supplies mainly the palate.
(b) Tonsillar artery (main artery of tonsil) pierces the superior 
constrictor and ends in the tonsil.
(c) Glandular branches supply the submandibular gland.
(d) Submental artery, a large artery which runs forwards on 
the mylohyoid muscle in company with mylohyoid nerve. 
It supplies the mylohyoid muscle and submandibular 
and sublingual salivary glands.
From the facial part (see Chapter 3, page 59)
4. Occipital artery: It arises from the posterior aspect of the 
external carotid artery at the same level as the facial artery. 
It runs backwards and upwards under cover of lower 
border of the posterior belly of digastric muscle superficial 
to internal carotid artery, internal jugular vein, and last 
four cranial nerves, crosses the apex of the posterior 
triangle. Then it runs deep to the mastoid process 
grooving the lower surface of the temporal bone medial 
to the mastoid notch. It crosses the superior oblique and 
semispinalis capitis and apex of suboccipital triangle to 
reach underneath the trapezius muscle, which it pierces 
2.5 cm away from the midline and comes to lie just lateral 
to the greater occipital nerve. It supplies most of the 
back of the scalp.
Branches
(a) Sternomastoid branches are usually two in number. They 
run downwards and backwards, and supply the 
sternocleidomastoid. The upper one accompanies the 
spinal accessory nerve and lower one is hooked by the 
hypoglossal nerve.
(b) Mastoid branch enters the cranial cavity through mastoid 
foramen and supplies mastoid air cells.
(c) Meningeal branches enter the cranial cavity through 
jugular foramen and hypoglossal canal to supply dura 
mater of posterior cranial fossa.
(d) Muscular branches supply adjoining muscles.
(e) Auricular branch (occasional) supplies the cranial surface 
of the auricle.
(f) Descending branch divides into superficial and deep 
branches. The superficial branch anastomoses with the 
superficial branch of transverse cervical artery and deep 
branch anastomoses with the deep cervical artery—a 
branch of the costocervical trunk of subclavian artery on 
the superficial and deep surfaces of the semispinalis 
capitis, respectively.
The descending branch of the occipital artery provides the 
chief collateral circulation after ligation of the external carotid 
or the subclavian artery (vide supra).
Clinical correlation
N.B.
• The hypoglossal nerve hooks the occipital artery under 
its site of origin.
• The upper sternomastoid branch of occipital artery 
accompanies the spinal accessory nerve and the lower 
sternomastoid branch crosses the hypoglossal nerve.
• Occipital artery crosses the apical part of the posterior 
triangle.
--- Page 255 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
5. Posterior auricular artery: It arises from the posterior 
aspect of the external carotid artery a little above the 
occipital artery. It crosses superficial to the stylohyoid 
muscle. It runs upwards and backwards parallel to the 
occipital artery along the upper border of the posterior 
belly of digastric muscle and deep to the parotid gland. 
Then it becomes superficial and lies on the base of 
mastoid process behind the ear which it supplies.
Branches
(a) Stylomastoid artery enters the stylomastoid foramen to 
supply middle ear, mastoid air cells, and facial nerve.
(b) Auricular branch supplies both cranial and lateral surfaces 
of the auricle.
(c) Occipital branch, supplies scalp above and behind the 
auricle.
The posterior auricular artery is cut in incisions for mastoid 
operations.
Clinical correlation
6. Ascending pharyngeal artery: It is a slender artery that 
arises from the medial aspect of the external carotid artery 
near its lower end. It runs vertically upwards between 
the side wall of the pharynx and internal carotid artery 
up to the base of the skull.
Branches
(a) Pharyngeal and prevertebral branches to corresponding 
muscles.
(b) Meningeal branches, which traverse foramina in the base 
of the skull.
(c) Inferior tympanic, which supplies medial wall of 
tympanic cavity.
(d) Palatine branches, which accompany levator veli palatini 
to the palate.
7. Superficial temporal artery: It is the smaller but more 
direct terminal branch of the external carotid artery. It 
begins behind the neck of the mandible deep to the upper 
part of the parotid gland. It runs vertically upwards 
crossing the root of zygoma in front of the tragus where 
its pulsation can be felt.
About 5 cm above the zygoma, it divides into anterior 
and posterior branches, which supply the temple and 
scalp.
Branches
(a) Transverse facial artery runs forwards across the masseter 
below the zygomatic arch.
(b) Anterior auricular branch, supplies the lateral surface of 
auricle and external auditory meatus.
(c) Zygomatico-orbital artery runs forwards along the upper 
border of zygomatic arch between two layers of temporal 
fascia and reaches the lateral angle of the eye.
(d) Middle (deep) temporal artery runs on the temporal fossa 
deep to temporalis muscle and supplies temporalis 
muscle and fascia.
(e) Anterior (frontal) and posterior (parietal) terminal 
branches.
The anterior branch supplies the muscles and skin of the 
frontal region. It is very tortuous and anastomoses with the 
branches of the ophthalmic artery. The posterior branch sup-
plies skin and the auricular muscles.
• Superficial temporal pulse: The pulsations of superficial 
temporal artery can be readily felt in front of the tragus of 
the ear (where it crosses the root of zygoma, the 
preauricular point). It serves the useful purpose to 
anesthetists to whom the radial pulse is not available 
during surgery. For this reason, it is also called 
anesthetist’s artery.
• The course of anterior terminal branch of the superficial 
temporal artery on the forehead can clearly be seen in a 
bald angry man. It becomes noticeably more tortuous with 
increasing age.
Clinical correlation
8. Maxillary artery: It is the larger terminal branch of the 
external carotid artery (see Chapter 10, page 136).
Internal Carotid Artery
The internal carotid artery is one of the two terminal 
branches of the common carotid artery but it is more direct. 
It is considered as an upward continuation of the common 
carotid artery. It supplies structures inside the skull and in the 
orbit. It is the principal artery to supply the brain and eye.
It begins as the upper border of the lamina of thyroid 
cartilage at the level of the disc between C3 and C4 vertebrae 
and runs upwards to reach the base of the skull, where it 
enters the carotid canal in the petrous temporal bone. It 
emerges in the cranial cavity by passing through the upper 
part of the foramen lacerum. In the cranial cavity, it enters 
the cavernous sinus and pursues a tortuous course before it 
ends below the anterior perforated substance of the brain by 
dividing into the anterior and middle cerebral arteries.
Parts
For the sake of convenience, the course of the internal carotid 
artery is divided into the following four parts:
1. Cervical part: It ascends vertically upwards from its ori-
gin to the base of the skull to reach the lower end of 
carotid canal and lies on the front of transverse process 
of upper cervical vertebrae. In the neck, the internal 
carotid artery is enclosed in the carotid sheath along 
with the internal jugular vein and vagus nerve.
The lower part of the artery is superficial and located 
in the carotid triangle. The upper part is deeply located
--- Page 256 ---
Blood Supply and Lymphatic Drainage of the Head and Neck
and lies deep to the posterior belly of digastric muscle, 
styloid process with structures attached to it, and parotid 
gland.
At the upper end, the internal jugular vein lies 
posterior to the internal carotid artery. Here the last four 
cranial nerves (glossopharyngeal, vagus, accessory, and 
hypoglossal) lie between the internal jugular vein and 
internal carotid artery.
Branches
In the neck, the internal carotid artery gives no branches.
2. Petrous part: The internal carotid artery enters the 
petrous part of the temporal bone in a carotid canal. It 
first runs upwards and then turns forwards and 
medially at the right angle. It emerges at the apex of 
petrous temporal bone in the posterior wall of foramen 
lacerum, and passes through its upper part to enter the 
cranial cavity.
Branches
(a) Caroticotympanic branches to middle ear, which 
anastomose with the anterior and posterior tympanic 
arteries.
(b) Pterygoid branch (small and inconstant) enters the 
pterygoid canal and anastomoses with the greater 
palatine artery.
3. Cavernous part: This part lies within the cavernous 
sinus. From foramen lacerum, the internal carotid artery 
ascends and enters the cavernous sinus. In the sinus, it 
passes forwards along the side of sella turcica in the floor 
and medial wall of the sinus. Here it lies outside the 
endothelial lining of the sinus and related to the 
abducent nerve inferolaterally.
In the anterior part of the sinus, the artery ascends 
and pierces the dural roof of the sinus between the 
anterior and middle clinoid processes to reach 
underneath the cerebrum.
Branches
(a) Cavernous branches to the trigeminal ganglion.
(b) Superior and inferior hypophyseal arteries to the 
hypophysis cerebri (pituitary gland).
4. Cerebral part: This part lies at the base of the brain. 
After emerging from the roof of the cavernous sinus, the 
artery turns backwards in the subarachnoid space along 
the roof of the cavernous sinus and lies below the optic 
nerve.
Finally it turns upwards by the side of the optic 
chiasma and reaches the anterior perforated substance 
of the brain located at the beginning of the stem of 
lateral sulcus of the cerebral hemisphere. Here it ends by 
dividing into anterior and middle cerebral arteries.
Branches
The branches of cerebral part of the internal carotid artery 
are described in detail in Chapter 29, page 407. The branches 
of internal carotid artery are summarized in Table 16.2.
Table 16.2 Summary of branches of the internal carotid 
artery
Part
Branches
Cervical part
No branches
Petrous part
1. Caroticotympanic branches
2. Pterygoid branch
Cavernous part
1. Cavernous branches
2. Superior and inferior hypophyseal arteries
Cerebral part
1. Ophthalmic artery
2. Anterior choroidal artery
3. Posterior communicating artery
Terminal branches
4. Anterior cerebral artery
5. Middle cerebral artery
N.B.
Carotid siphon: The U-shaped bend formed by the internal 
carotid artery while passing through and above the 
cavernous sinus is called carotid siphon. It probably 
dampens down the pulsations of the artery. The carotid 
siphon is an important feature to be seen in cerebral 
angiography.
The carotid vessels are exposed during elective arterial 
surgery 
aneurysms, 
arteriovenous 
fistulae, 
arteriosclerotic occlusion. It is now established that partial 
or complete obstruction due to arteriosclerosis is a common 
cause of cerebral stroke. In fact, it may account for 20% of 
the cerebrovascular accidents, which at one time were 
believed to be either due to intracranial hemorrhage or 
thrombosis.
Clinical correlation
The structures passing between the external and internal 
carotid arteries are as follows (Fig. 16.12):
1. Deep part of the parotid gland.
2. Styloid process.
3. Styloglossus muscle.
4. Stylopharyngeus muscle.
5. Glossopharyngeal nerve.
6. Pharyngeal branch of the vagus nerve.
VEINS
The major veins draining the head and neck are subclavian, 
internal jugular, external jugular, and anterior jugular veins
--- Page 257 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
The valves in the lumen are mostly absent in the veins 
draining head and neck area, unlike in the rest of the body. 
This leads to two-way flow of blood dictated by local 
pressure changes. For this reason, infections in the head and 
neck area can lead to serious complications.
SUBCLAVIAN VEIN
It is the continuation of axillary vein and extends from the 
outer border of the first rib to the medial border of the 
scalenus anterior, where it joins the internal jugular vein to 
form brachiocephalic vein (Fig. 16.13). The subclavian vein is 
principally the vein of the upper limb.
The subclavian vein forms an arch across the pleura at a 
level below the arch of the subclavian artery. The two arches 
are separated from each other by the scalenus anterior.
It seldom rises above the level of the clavicle and possesses 
a pair of valves about 2 cm from its termination.
Relations (Fig. 16.14)
In front: Clavicle and subclavius muscle.
Behind: Subclavian artery with intervening scalenus anterior 
muscle and phrenic nerve.
Below: First rib and cupola of pleura.
Tributaries
The following are the tributaries of the subclavian vein:
Styloid process
Deep part of
parotid gland
Styloglossus muscle
Pharyngeal branch of 
vagus
Glossopharyngeal nerve
Stylopharyngeus muscle
Fig. 16.12 Structures passing between the internal and 
external carotid arteries.
Right external jugular vein
Left internal jugular vein
Left subclavian vein
First rib
Arch of aorta
Right subclavian vein
Superior vena cava
Clavicle
Left external jugular vein
Right internal jugular vein
Fig. 16.13 Great blood vessels at the root of the neck.
(Fig. 16.13). The internal jugular vein is the principal vein of 
the head and neck region for it drains the brain as well as most 
of the other tissues of the head and neck. The external jugular 
vein drains only a portion of extracranial tissues.
--- Page 258 ---
Blood Supply and Lymphatic Drainage of the Head and Neck
1. External jugular vein.
2. Dorsal scapular vein.
3. Thoracic duct on the left side and right lymphatic duct 
on the right side
4. Anterior jugular vein.
5. Cephalic vein. 
 Only sometimes
• Subclavian vein catheterization: The subclavian vein is 
located immediately posterior to the medial third of the 
clavicle. It can be catheterized both from below (infra-
clavicular 
approach) 
above 
(supraclavicular 
approach) the clavicle.
In infraclavicular approach, the needle is inserted just 
below the lower border of the clavicle at the junction of its 
medial one-third and lateral two-third. The needle is 
directed upwards and posteriorly towards the middle of 
the jugular notch.
In supraclavicular approach, the needle is inserted at 
the junction of lateral border of the clavicular head of 
sterno cleidomastoid and upper border of the clavicle. The 
needle is directed downwards and medially towards the 
mediastinum.
• Subclavian vein thrombosis: It can be spontaneous 
(primary) or secondary. Clinically, it presents as edema of 
the upper limb especially after exercise. The primary 
thrombosis occasionally occurs due to excessive and 
unaccustomed use of arm at the shoulder joint. The 
secondary thrombosis occurs as a complication of an 
indwelling venous catheter.
Clinical correlation
INTERNAL JUGULAR VEIN
The internal jugular vein is usually the largest vein in the 
neck. It begins as the direct continuation of the sigmoid 
sinus at the base of the skull below the jugular foramen and 
descends vertically downwards to end behind the sternal end 
of the clavicle by joining the subclavian vein to form the 
brachiocephalic vein. The internal jugular vein drains brain 
and most of the tissues of the head and neck (Fig. 16.15).
N.B. The right internal jugular vein is usually larger than the 
left because it drains the blood from the larger superior 
sagittal sinus, c.f. the left internal jugular vein drains blood 
from the smaller inferior sagittal sinus.
Special Features
1. It presents two dilatations: 
 First, at its commencement, which lies in the jugular 
fossa of the temporal bone. It is known as superior 
bulb and is related to the floor of the middle ear.
 Second, close to its termination, which lies in the lesser 
supraclavicular fossa between the sternal and 
clavicular heads of sternocleidomastoid. It is known as 
inferior bulb and is guarded by a pair of valves.
2. It is vertically applied to the lateral side of the internal 
and common carotid arteries, enclosed with them and 
the vagus nerve in the facial sheath called carotid sheath.
3. The deep cervical lymph nodes lie along its entire course.
Subclavian vein
Subclavian artery
Cupola of pleura
First rib
Scalenus anterior
Phrenic nerve
Fig. 16.14 Relations of the subclavian vein.
Right sigmoid sinus
Inferior
petrosal sinuses
Pharyngeal
veins
Middle thyroid veins
Common
facial veins
Lingual
veins
Thoracic duct
Superior
thyroid
veins
Right
lymphatic
duct
Occipital
vein
External
jugular vein
Communication
between external
and internal
jugular vein
Right
subclavian vein
Left
subclavian vein
Left sigmoid sinus
Fig. 16.15 Beginning and termination of the internal 
jugular veins along with their tributaries.
--- Page 259 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
4. It is remarkably constant in position and can be marked 
on the surface by a vertical line extending from midpoint 
between the tip of the mastoid process and the angle of 
the mandible, to the sternoclavicular joint.
N.B. At the lower end, both the internal jugular veins (right 
and left) tend to shift to the right, so that the right comes to 
lie further lateral to the right common carotid artery while 
the left tends to overlap the left common carotid artery.
Relations
Deep (posterior):
From above downwards, these are (Fig. 16.16) as follows:
1. Rectus capitis lateralis.
2. Transverse process of atlas.
3. Levator scapulae.
4. Scalenus medius and cervical plexus.
5. Scalenus anterior and phrenic nerve.
6. Thyrocervical trunk and first part of vertebral artery.
7. First part of the subclavian artery.
8. Thoracic duct on the left side.
9. The sternocleidomastoid overlaps the upper part and 
covers the lower part of the vein.
Superficial (anterolateral; Fig. 16.17):
These are as follows:
1. Crossed by two muscles
(a) Posterior belly of digastric muscle in the upper part.
(b) Inferior belly of omohyoid in the lower part.
2. Crossed by two arteries
(a) Occipital artery.
(b) Posterior auricular artery.
3. Crossed by one vein: anterior jugular vein
4. Crossed by two nerves
(a) Spinal accessory nerve.
(b) Inferior root of ansa cervicalis (descendens cervicalis).
5. At the base of skull the internal carotid artery lies in 
front of the internal jugular vein and the last four 
cranial nerves intervene between the vein and the artery.
Medial:
Medially the vein is related to:
1. Internal carotid artery and 9th, 10th, 11th, and 12th 
cranial nerves in the upper part.
2. Common carotid artery and vagus nerve in the lower part.
Fig. 16.16 Deep (posterior) relations of the internal jugular 
vein.
Internal
jugular vein
Structures forming posterior
relations of internal jugular vein
Rectus capitis
lateralis
Transverse process of
atlas
Levator scapulae
Scalenus medius
Cervical plexus
Scalenus anterior
Phrenic nerve
Thyrocervical trunk
Vertebral artery
(first part)
Subclavian artery
(first part)
Fig. 16.17 Superficial (anterolateral) relations of the internal 
jugular vein.
Anterior jugular vein
Omohyoid (superior belly)
Inferior root of
ansa cervicalis
Occipital artery
Posterior belly of
digastric
Posterior auricular
artery
Styloid process
Spinal accessory
nerve
--- Page 260 ---
Blood Supply and Lymphatic Drainage of the Head and Neck
Tributaries (Fig. 16.15)
1. Inferior petrosal vein—is usually the first tributary and 
joins the internal jugular vein immediately below the 
jugular foramen.
2. Pharyngeal veins—from pharyngeal plexus.
3. Common facial vein.
4. Lingual vein.
5. Superior thyroid vein.
6. Middle thyroid vein.
7. Occipital vein (only sometimes).
In addition to the above mentioned tributaries, the right 
lymphatic duct on the right side and thoracic duct on the 
left side, usually open into internal jugular vein or into the 
junction between the internal jugular vein and the subclavian 
vein.
N.B. In the upper part of the neck internal jugular vein 
may communicate with the external jugular vein by an 
oblique jugular vein across the anterior border of 
sternocleidomastoid muscle.
• The internal jugular vein acts as a guide for surgeons 
during removal of deep cervical lymph nodes. The facial 
(or common facial) vein is most important tributary of the 
internal jugular vein for it serves as a useful landmark in 
removal of the jugulodigastric (tonsillar) and upper anterior 
group of deep cervical lymph nodes.
• The malignant and tuberculous lymph nodes often get 
adhered to the internal jugular vein and not uncommonly 
the surgeon has to resect a portion of the vessel in order 
to facilitate their removal.
• Sometimes a thrill is felt at the root of the neck (in lesser 
supraclavicular fossa) during contraction of atria in 
systole, particularly in case of mitral stenosis.
• The vein is safely cannulated by inserting a needle at the 
apex of the lesser supraclavicular fossa. The needle is 
directed backwards and upwards to avoid the puncture of 
cervical pleura, which, if punctured, will lead to 
pneumothorax.
Clinical correlation
The anterior jugular and external jugular veins are 
described in detail in Chapter 4.
Accessory nerve
Styloid process
Facial artery
Glossopharyngeal nerve
Lingual artery
External laryngeal nerve
Descendens hypoglossi
Ascending pharyngeal artery
Superior thyroid artery
Common carotid artery
Internal laryngeal nerve
Internal carotid artery
External carotid artery
Stylopharyngeus
Occipital artery
Hypoglossal nerve
Vagus nerve
Internal jugular vein
Superior laryngeal
branch of vagus
Pharyngeal
branch of vagus
Spinal accessory
nerve
Cranial root of
accessory
Fig. 16.18 Carotid arteries and nerves associated with them in the neck.
--- Page 261 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
CAROTID SHEATH
The carotid sheath extends from the base of the skull above 
to the arch of the aorta below. At the upper end it is attached 
to the margins of carotid canal and the jugular fossa.
The upper part of the carotid sheath contains internal 
carotid artery, internal jugular vein, and last four cranial 
nerves (Fig. 16.18). Medial to it lies pharynx, lateral to it lies 
styloid apparatus, anterior to it lies infratemporal fossa, and 
posterior to it lies cervical sympathetic trunk on the 
prevertebral fascia.
The lower part of carotid sheath contains common carotid 
artery, internal jugular vein, and vagus nerve.
STYLOID APPARATUS
The styloid apparatus consists of styloid process and structures 
attached to it.
The structures attached to styloid process (Fig. 16.19) are:
1. Three muscles: stylohyoid, styloglossus, and stylo-
pharyngeus.
2. Two ligaments: stylohyoid and stylomandibular.
The five elongated structures attached to styloid process 
resemble the reins of a chariot. Two of these reins (ligaments) 
are non-adjustable, whereas the remaining three reins 
(muscles) are adjustable, with each being controlled by 
separate cranial nerve, e.g., stylohyoid, stylopharyngeus, and 
styloglossus are supplied by 7th, 9th, and 12th cranial nerves, 
respectively.
STYLOID PROCESS
The styloid process is long, slender, pointed bony process 
projecting anteroinferiorly from the inferior aspect of the 
temporal bone. Its length is variable, ranging from 2–3 mm 
to an average of 2.5 cm.
Its proximal part (tympanohyal) is ensheathed by the 
tympanic plate, while its muscles and ligaments are attached 
to its distal part (stylohyal). Its relation in vivo is important:
1. It projects between external and internal carotid arteries.
2. It is interposed between the parotid gland laterally and 
internal jugular vein medially.
3. Laterally, facial nerve crosses its base and external carotid 
artery crosses its apex.
MUSCLES
Stylohyoid Muscle
It is a slender muscle extending from posterior surface of the 
styloid process to the hyoid bone at the junction between its 
body and greater cornu (for details see Chapter 9). It helps in 
controlling movements of the hyoid bone.
Styloglossus Muscle
It extends from anterior surface of the tip of the styloid process 
and adjoining part of the stylohyoid ligament to the side of 
the tongue. It pulls the tongue upwards and backwards (for 
details see Chapter 9).
Stylopharyngeus Muscle
It extends from medial side of the base of the styloid process 
to the posterior border of the lamina of the thyroid cartilage. 
It helps to elevate the larynx during swallowing and 
phonation (for details see Chapter 14).
LIGAMENTS
Stylohyoid Ligament
It extends from tip of the styloid process to the lesser cornu 
of the hyoid bone.
Stylomandibular Ligament
It extends from the tip of the styloid process to the angle of 
ramus of the mandible. Sometimes it is pierced by the cervical 
part of the facial artery.
Eagle’s syndrome: Normally, the tip of styloid process is 
located between the external and internal carotid arteries, 
just lateral to the tonsillar fossa. The elongated styloid 
process or calcification of stylohyoid ligament can cause 
recurrent throat pain in the region of tonsillar fossa and 
upper neck, which radiates to the ipsilateral ear. It 
aggravates during swallowing. This clinical condition is 
termed styalgia or Eagle’s syndrome.
Clinical correlation
Stylohyoid muscle
Styloid process
Styloglossus muscle
Stylohyoid ligament
Stylomandibular
ligament
Stylopharyngeus
muscle
Middle constrictor
of pharynx
Fig. 16.19 Styloid apparatus.
--- Page 262 ---
Blood Supply and Lymphatic Drainage of the Head and Neck
LYMPHATIC DRAINAGE OF THE
HEAD AND NECK
The knowledge of lymphatic drainage of the head and 
neck is extremely important because the cancers arising in 
this region have predictable patterns of spread through 
the chains of lymph nodes in the neck, which help the 
surgeons to remove the desired lymph nodes. The lymph 
nodes and other lymphoid tissues in the head and neck 
are often inflamed and produce swellings, which are 
examined by physicians in day-to-day practice. All the 
lymph from the region of head and neck drains into deep 
cervical lymph nodes either (a) directly from the tissues or 
(b) indirectly after passing through the outlying groups of 
lymph nodes.
The efferents from deep cervical nodes form the jugular 
trunk, which on the right side drains into the right lym-
phatic duct and on the left side into the thoracic duct. The 
right lymphatic duct and thoracic duct generally empty 
into the junction of the subclavian and internal jugular 
veins on their respective sides.
LYMPH NODES
Out of total 800 lymph nodes in the body, about 300 lymph 
nodes are located in the region of the head and neck only. 
The lymph nodes in the region of the head and neck are 
broadly classified into two groups: peripheral and terminal 
(Fig. 16.20).
PERIPHERAL LYMPH NODES
Peripheral lymph nodes (also called outlying lymph nodes). 
They are usually found in groups, which are arranged in 
outer and inner circles (Fig. 16.21):
1. Outer circle: It is formed by lymph node groups, 
which form the pericervical or cervical collar at 
the junction of the head and neck (craniocervical 
junction) and extends from chin in front to the 
occiput 
behind. 
They 
include 
submental, 
submandibular, superficial parotid (preauricular), 
mastoid (postauricular), and occipital nodes.
Mastoid nodes
Occipital nodes
External jugular vein
Superficial cervical nodes
Supraclavicular nodes
Subclavian vein
Lymph nodes surrounding
spinal accessory nerve
Suprasternal node
Tracheal nodes
Paratracheal nodes
Prelaryngeal nodes
Anterior jugular vein
Infrahyoid node
Submental nodes
Submandibular nodes
Mandibular node
Buccal node
Facial artery
Infraorbital node
Retropharyngeal
Anterior cervical nodes
Fig. 16.20 Lymph nodes of the head and neck.
--- Page 263 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
Outlying extensions of lymph node groups of pericervical 
collar:
(a) Facial nodes: These are extensions of submandibular 
nodes and include:
 a small buccal node lying on the lateral surface of 
the buccinator along the facial vein.
 a small mandibular node which is frequently 
present where facial vessels cross the lower border 
of the mandible.
 a small infraorbital node lying just below the orbit.
(b) Superficial cervical nodes: They are situated 
superficial to sternomastoid (upper part) along the 
external jugular vein. These are the extensions of 
parotid nodes.
(c) Anterior cervical nodes: They are situated along the 
anterior jugular vein. One member of this group 
frequently lies in the suprasternal space (suprasternal 
node). They are extensions of submental lymph 
nodes.
2. Inner circle: The inner circle is formed by following 
lymph node groups, which lie deep to the investing layer 
of deep cervical fascia (Fig. 16.21):
(a) Infrahyoid nodes: These lie in front of thyrohyoid 
membrane.
(b) Prelaryngeal nodes: These are situated in front of the 
conus elasticus or cricothyroid membrane.
(c) Pretracheal lymph nodes: These lie in front of trachea 
below the isthmus of thyroid gland.
3. Paratracheal nodes: These nodes flank the trachea and 
esophagus on either side along the recurrent laryngeal 
nerves.
4. Retropharyngeal lymph node: These lie posterior to 
pharynx and in front of prevertebral fascia in the 
retropharyngeal space (Fig. 16.22).
N.B.
Deep to inner circle, there is a submucosal ring of 
aggregated masses of lymphoid tissue called tonsils, which 
surround the commencement of air and food passages. 
These together constitute the Waldeyer’s lymphatic ring 
(Fig. 16.23). The lymph from lymphoid tissue of this ring 
Fig. 16.21 General plan of location of the lymph node groups in the region of the head and neck.
Peripheral (outlying) lymph nodes
Outer circle
Inner circle
Paratracheal
Prelaryngeal and pretracheal
Occipital
Occipital
Preauricular
Retropharyngeal
Submandibular
Submental
Internal
jugular vein
Terminal
(deep cervical)
lymph nodes
Submandibular
Postauricular
Preauricular
Postauricular
Terminal
(deep cervical)
lymph nodes
Fig. 16.22 Retropharyngeal lymph nodes.
Atlas vertebra
Internal
jugular
vein
Retropharyngeal
lymph nodes
Prevertebral
fascia
Longus capitis
Buccopharyngeal
fascia
Posterior wall of
pharynx
Internal
carotid
artery
--- Page 264 ---
Blood Supply and Lymphatic Drainage of the Head and Neck
drains into pericervical chain and deep cervical chain, which 
constitutes the external ring of Waldeyer.
TERMINAL LYMPH NODES
These are deep cervical lymph nodes that lie along and 
around the internal jugular vein, some within the carotid 
sheath and some on the surface of the sheath, under cover of 
sternocleidomastoid.
For the convenience of description deep cervical lymph 
nodes are divided into upper and lower groups (superior and 
inferior deep cervical nodes), though there is no clear 
demarcation between them:
1. Superior group of deep cervical lymph nodes: They lie 
above the omohyoid. One lymph node of this group is 
situated below the posterior belly of digastric between the 
angle of the mandible and anterior border of the 
sternocleidomastoid in the triangle formed by posterior 
belly of digastric, facial vein, and internal jugular vein. It 
is called jugulodigastric node.
It drains the lymph primarily from the palatine tonsil. 
Therefore it is also termed lymph node of the tonsil.
When enlarged due to pathology in the palatine tonsil, it 
is easily palpable behind and below the angle of the 
mandible.
2. Lower group of deep cervical lymph nodes: One of the 
lymph nodes of this group lies above the intermediate 
tendon of omohyoid posterior to the internal jugular vein. 
It is called jugulo-omohyoid lymph node. Since this 
lymph node drains lymph primarily from the tongue, it 
is termed lymph node of the tongue. This node lies deep 
to sternocleidomastoid, and therefore, can be palpated 
only if enlarged considerably.
Some nodes of this group extend into the 
supraclavicular fossa and are related to brachial plexus 
and subclavian vessels. These are termed supraclavicular 
lymph nodes (Virchow’s lymph nodes). The left 
supraclavicular lymph nodes are clinically important 
because they are common site of metastasis from 
malignant disease (cancer) of the stomach. The testicular 
and esophageal cancers can also metastasize in these 
nodes. The Virchow’s lymph nodes are often palpable in 
cancer stomach. One or two lymph nodes of this group 
lie in contact with accessory nerve at a higher level in the 
posterior triangle.
Surgical neck dissection: The cancers arising in the head 
and neck region from structures such as nasopharynx, 
paranasal air sinuses, oral cavity, oropharynx, larynx, and 
thyroid gland have predictable patterns of spread through 
the chains of lymph nodes in the neck. When operating to 
remove malignant lesion in this region, it is vitally important 
to understand these patterns of spread. The surgeons 
classify lymph nodes in neck into the following levels:
• Level I nodes are in the submental and submandibular 
triangles.
• Level II nodes lie around the upper portion of internal 
jugular vein and upper part of spinal accessory nerve. 
They extend from the base of the skull to the bifurcation of 
the common carotid artery or the hyoid bone.
• Level III nodes lie around the middle third of the internal 
jugular vein and extend from inferior border of level II to 
the intermediate tendon of omohyoid (cricoid cartilage).
• Level IV nodes lie around the lower third of the internal 
jugular vein and extend from lower border of level III to the 
clavicle. It also includes supraclavicular lymph nodes.
• Level V nodes are in the posterior triangle of the neck, 
related to the spinal accessory nerve.
• Level VI nodes are nodes surrounding the midline 
visceral structures and include the pretracheal and 
paratracheal nodes.
• Level VII nodes are in the superior mediastinum. Knowing 
which levels of nodes are likely to be involved in the 
metastatic spread of a particular cancer, an appropriate 
nodal clearance is undertaken.
The classical radical neck dissection involves the 
removal of level I to V nodes and removal of the 
sternocleidomastoid muscle, internal jugular vein, and 
spinal accessory nerve.
The modified radical neck dissection (also called 
functional neck dissection) involves the removal of level I 
to V nodes but spares either or all of sternocleidomastoid 
muscle, internal jugular vein, and spinal accessory nerve.
The selective neck dissection involves some but not 
level I to V nodes.
Clinical correlation
Fig. 16.23 Waldeyer’s internal and external rings.
Retropharyngeal lymph nodes
Jugulodigastric
lymph node
Upper deep
cervical lymph
nodes
Submandibular lymph nodes
Tubal tonsil
Pharyngeal
tonsil
Lingual
tonsil
Palatine tonsil
Submental lymph nodes
--- Page 265 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
A 67-year-old man was keeping quite well until he 
suddenly developed weakness in his limbs on the right 
side. This lasted for about 12 hours and then improved 
spontaneously and he recovered completely after 24 
hours. His family physician thought that he may have a 
transient ischemic attack of brain (cerebral stroke). He 
was referred to a neurocentre by his family physician 
for thorough check-up by a neurosurgeon. On 
examination, the surgeon heard a bruit at the level of 
origin of common carotid artery on the left side. The 
color Doppler ultrasound scan revealed more than 75%
narrowing of the internal carotid artery at its origin. A 
carotid angiogram confirmed this narrowing.
Questions
1. At what level does the common carotid terminate 
by dividing into internal and external carotid 
arteries?
2. What is bruit?
3. What are the main relations at the bifurcation of 
common carotid artery?
4. Why does a patient develop signs of a cerebral 
stroke if there is formation of atheroma in the 
 internal carotid artery?
Answers
1. At the level of upper border of lamina of the 
thyroid cartilage.
2. It is a noise of blood flow produced when it passes 
through a narrowed vessel.
3. The common carotid artery is present in the carotid 
sheath containing internal jugular vein laterally 
and vagus nerve between and behind the artery 
and vein. The cervical sympathetic chain lies 
behind the carotid sheath on prevertebral fascia.
4. A portion of atheroma gets detached, and enters 
the middle cerebral artery and blocks it. This leads 
cerebral ischemia. Consequently, the patient 
develops the signs of cerebral stroke.
Clinical Case Study
Golden Facts to Remember
  Chief arteries of the head and neck
Right and left common carotid arteries
  Chief veins of the head and neck
Right and left internal jugular veins
  All the branches of subclavian artery (generally) 
arise from its first part except
Costocervical trunk on the right side which arises 
from second part of that side
  Largest branch of the first part of the subclavian 
artery
Vertebral artery
  Shortest branch of the subclavian artery
Thyrocervical trunk
  Most superficial part of the subclavian artery
Third part
  Most constant pulse in the body
Carotid pulse
  Anesthetist’s artery
Superficial temporal artery
  All the lymph node groups of pericervical collar 
are paired except
Submental group of lymph nodes which is unpaired
  Lymph node of tonsil
Jugulodigastric lymph node
  Lymph node of tongue
Jugulo-omohyoid lymph node
--- Page 266 ---
Nose and Paranasal 
Air Sinuses
CHAPTER
NOSE
The nose is the uppermost part of the respiratory tract and 
contains the peripheral organ of smell.
It consists of the external nose and the nasal cavity. The 
Greek Word for nose is rhinos. Thus the study of the nose and 
its diseases is termed rhinology.
The functions of the nose are:
1. Respiration.
2. Olfaction.
3. Protection of the lower respiratory passages.
4. Air conditioning of the inspired air.
5. Vocal resonance.
6. Nasal reflex functions (e.g., sneezing).
A detailed knowledge of anatomy of the nose is essential to:
1. ENT and plastic surgeons to correct the various 
deformities of nose and enhance the looks of the face.
Physicians to treat diseases like rhinitis, sinusitis, and 
respiratory 
diseases 
including 
asthma 
environmental pollution.
EXTERNAL NOSE
FEATURES
The external nose is a pyramidal projection in the mid face. 
It presents the following features (Fig. 17.1):
1. Tip (or apex), the lower free end.
2. Root or bridge, the upper narrow part, which is 
continuous with the forehead.
3. Dorsum, a round border between tip and root where 
sides of the nose meet.
Nostrils or nares, the two piriform apertures at the broad 
lower end.
5. Ala, the lower flared part on the side of nose.
Fig. 17.1 Features of the external nose: A, front view; B, lateral view.
Root of nose
Root of nose
Dorsum of nose
Side of nose
Ala of nose
Philtrum
Forehead
Nostril
Tip of nose
Columella
Nostril
Tip of nose
--- Page 267 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
Skin
The skin covering the nose (nasal skin) is thin and loosely 
attached to the underlying structures, hence freely mobile. 
Over the apex and alae, it is thicker and more adherent and 
contains large sebaceous glands, whose orifices are usually 
very distinct. The hypertrophy of these sebaceous glands 
gives rise to a lobulated tumor—the rhinophyma.
Skeleton
The skeletal framework (Fig. 17.2) of the external nose is 
partly bony and partly cartilaginous.
The upper one-third of the external nose is bony and 
lower two-third is cartilaginous.
The bony framework is formed by:
(a) two nasal bones (forming the bridge of the nose), and
(b) frontal processes of the maxillae.
The two nasal bones meet in the midline and rest on the upper 
part of the nasal process of the frontal bone. They are held 
together between the frontal processes of the maxillae. The 
bony part of external nose terminates in front and below as 
the piriform aperture.
The cartilaginous framework of the nose is formed by 
five main cartilages and several additional tiny ones.
The five main cartilages of the nose are as follows:
1. Two lateral cartilages.
2. A single median septal cartilage.
3. Two major alar cartilages.
The lateral and major alar cartilages are also termed 
superior and inferior lateral cartilages, respectively.
The cartilaginous framework is anchored to the piriform 
aperture by fibrous tissue.
The lateral cartilages, one on each side, articulate above 
with the margin of piriform aperture formed by the frontal 
process of maxilla and the nasal bone and below with the 
major alar cartilage. Medially, it is continuous by a narrow 
bridge with the septal cartilage.
The major alar cartilage is U-shaped and comprises of 
a medial and lateral crus. The medial crura of two sides 
meet in the midline below the lower margin of the septal 
cartilage to form the lower part of the nasal septum called 
columella.
The anterosuperior border of septal cartilage runs from 
under the nasal bones to the tip of the nose. It supports the 
dorsum of the cartilaginous part of the nose.
The lateral crus of major alar cartilage extends into the 
ala of the nose but does not reach the bony margin; the gap 
is filled by fibrofatty tissue and minor alar cartilages.
In addition to five main cartilages of the nose, there are 
two or more tiny cartilages, which lie above and lateral to 
major alar cartilage on either side and termed minor alar (or 
sesamoid) cartilages. They are of no functional and clinical 
significance.
• Nasal fractures: Because the nose is the most projecting 
part of the face, the fractures of nasal bones are common 
facial fractures.
Clinical correlation
Maxillary part of
piriform aperture
Septal cartilage
Nasal bone
Nasal process of 
frontal bone
Continuity
between lateral and 
septal cartilages
Lateral cartilage
Lesser alar
cartilages
Lateral crus of 
major alar cartilage
Medial crus of major alar cartilage
Nasal bone
Lateral nasal cartilage
Major alar cartilage
(Greater alar cartilage)
Frontal process of 
maxilla
Lesser alar
cartilages
Fibrofatty
tissue of ala
Fibrofatty
tissue of ala
Lateral crus
Columella
Nostril/naris
Medial crus
Caudal border of
septal cartilage
Frontal process of 
maxilla
Fig. 17.2 Osseocartilaginous framework of the external 
nose: A, anterior view; B, lateral view; C, basal view.
--- Page 268 ---
Nose and Paranasal Air Sinuses
• The medial and lateral crura of major alar cartilage 
maintain the patency of the nostril (Fig. 17.2). The angle 
between the medial and lateral crura is variable, being 
acute in high narrow noses, and obtuse in low broad 
noses with flaring alae. This anatomical fact is of great 
significance in plastic surgery of the nose.
NASAL CAVITY
The interior of the nose (also called internal nose) is divided 
into right and left nasal cavities by a nasal septum 
(Fig. 17.3A).
Each nasal cavity communicates with the exterior through 
nostril (or naris) and with the nasopharynx through the 
posterior nasal aperture (or the choana; Fig. 17.3B). Each 
nasal cavity is divided into two portions: (a) a small 
anteroinferior part lined by skin—the vestibule and (b) a 
large posterosuperior part lined by mucosa—the nasal cavity 
proper.
VESTIBULE OF NOSE
It is the anteroinferior part of nasal cavity, lined by skin. The 
skin contains sebaceous glands, hair follicles, and the stiff 
interlacing hair called vibrissae. Its upper limit on the lateral 
wall of nasal cavity is marked by limen nasi. Its medial wall is 
formed by a mobile columella.
NASAL CAVITY PROPER
Boundaries
The nasal cavity proper presents the following boundaries:
1. Roof.
2. Floor.
3. Medial wall (septum).
4. Lateral wall.
Roof: The roof is very narrow in front and widens to about 
1 cm near the choanae. It is horizontal in the middle third, 
where it is formed by the cribriform plate of the ethmoid. 
Through this olfactory nerves enter the cranial cavity from 
the nasal cavity.
The anterior third of roof slopes downwards and forwards. 
It is formed by the nasal spine of the frontal, the nasal bone 
and the junction of the septal and lateral cartilages. The 
posterior third of the roof also slopes downwards and 
backwards (Fig. 17.3B). It is formed by the anterior surfaces 
of the body of the sphenoid.
Floor: The floor is almost horizontal. It is formed by the 
upper surface of the hard palate, i.e., anterior three-fourth is 
formed by palatine process of maxilla and posterior one-
fourth is formed by the horizontal plate of the palatine bone.
Medial wall: It is formed by nasal septum. The nasal septum 
is a median osseocartilaginous partition between the two 
nasal cavities. It is seldom exactly in the median plane but 
bulges to one or the other side, more frequently to the right.
The bony part is formed by (Fig. 17.4):
(a) perpendicular plate of ethmoid, which forms the 
posterosuperior part of the septum, and
(b) vomer, which forms the posteroinferior part of the septum.
N.B. In addition, the nasal spine of fontal bone, crest 
formed by nasal bones, sphenoidal crest, and nasal crest 
formed by the fusion of palatine processes of maxillae and 
horizontal plates of palatine bones also contribute a bit in 
the formation of nasal septum.
The cartilaginous part is formed by (Fig. 17.4):
(a) septal cartilage, which forms the major anterior part of 
the septum and fits in the angle between the vomer and 
perpendicular plate of ethmoid, and
(b) septal processes of the two major alar cartilages.
N.B. The septal processes (medial crura) of two major alar 
cartilages are united together in the midline by a fibrous 
tissue to form columella (also called columellar septum).
Between the columella and caudal border of the septal 
cartilage, a small portion of septum is made up of double 
layer of the skin with no bony or cartilaginous support. This 
part is referred to as membranous septum.
Both columellar and membranous parts are freely 
movable from side-to-side.
Floor
Roof
Choana
Nasal septum
Superior concha
Middle concha
Inferior concha
Nasal cavities
Nasopharynx
Nostril or
naris
Fig. 17.3 Interior of the nose: A, division of the internal 
nose into right and left nasal cavities; B, communication of 
nasal cavity to exterior through nostril and to nasopharynx 
through choana.
--- Page 269 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
• Deviated nasal septum (DNS): The deviated nasal 
septum is not uncommon and is an important cause of 
nasal obstruction. The males are affected more than 
females. It occurs due to numerous factors such as 
trauma, developmental error, etc. If DNS is severe and 
causing mechanical obstruction, leading to difficulty in 
breathing sinusitis, headache, excessive snoring, etc., it is 
corrected by submucous resection (SMR) or septoplasty. 
(For details consult ENT textbooks.)
• The septal cartilage not only forms partition between the 
right and left nasal cavities but also provides support to
Clinical correlation
 the dorsum of the anterior two-third of the nose. Therefore, 
its destruction due to disease or excessive removal in 
submucous resection leads to supratip depression of the 
external nose.
Lateral wall: The lateral wall of the nose (Fig. 17.5) is 
complicated. It is formed by a number of bones and 
cartilages (Fig. 17.5).
The bones forming the lateral wall are:
(a) nasal,
(b) frontal process of maxilla,
(c) lacrimal,
Fig. 17.4 Formation of the nasal septum.
Posterosuperior part
Perpendicular plate of 
ethmoid
Sphenoidal crest
(Rostrum of sphenoid)
Vomer
Postero-
inferior part
Palatine bone
Nasal crest of
maxillary and
palatine bone
Nasal spine of
frontal bone
Nasal bone
Crest of nasal bones
Septal cartilage
Anterior part
Septal process
of major alar
cartilage
Sphenoidal air sinus
Occipital
Frontal process of
maxilla
Nasal bone
Lateral crus of
greater alar cartilage
Descending process
of lacrimal bone
Superior and middle
conchae of ethmoid bone
Sphenopalatine
foramen
Uncinate process of 
ethmoid
Medial pterygoid
plate of sphenoid
Ethmoidal process of
inferior nasal concha
Opening of maxillary sinus
Maxillary process of
inferior nasal concha
Mucous membrane
Lacrimal process of
inferior nasal concha
Perpendicular plate of 
palatine
Lateral nasal
cartilage
Fig. 17.5 Formation of the lateral wall of the nasal cavity. Red circle indicates the position of maxillary air sinus.
--- Page 270 ---
Nose and Paranasal Air Sinuses
(d) conchae and labyrinth of ethmoid,
(e) inferior nasal concha,
(f) perpendicular plate of palatine, and
(g) medial pterygoid plate of sphenoid.
The cartilages forming the lateral wall are:
(a) lateral nasal cartilage (upper nasal cartilage),
(b) major alar cartilage (lower nasal cartilage), and
(c) three to four tiny cartilages of the alae (minor alar 
cartilages).
Features (Fig. 17.6): The lateral wall is divided into the 
following three areas:
Anterior part presents a small depressed area, the vestibule.
It is lined by the skin containing vibrissae (short, stiff 
curved hair).
Middle part is known as atrium of the middle meatus. It 
is limited above by a faint ridge of mucous membrane, 
the agger nasi. The curved mucocutaneous junction 
between the atrium and vestibule is known as limen
nasi.
3. Posterior part presents three scroll-like projections, the 
conchae or turbinates. The spaces separating the conchae 
are called meatuses.
The conchae and meatuses form the main features of the 
lateral wall:
Conchae (also called turbinates) are the curved bony 
projections directed downwards and medially. Below and 
lateral to each concha is a corresponding meatus. From 
above downwards the conchae are superior, middle, and 
inferior nasal conchae. Sometimes a 4th concha, the concha 
suprema is also present.
Conchae:
1. Superior and middle nasal conchae are the projections 
from the medial surface of the ethmoidal labyrinth.
2. Inferior concha is an independent bone.
3. The superior concha is smallest and inferior concha is 
largest in size.
Meatuses:
Meatuses are the passages (recesses) beneath the overhanging 
conchae. They are visualized once conchae are removed.
1. Inferior meatus is the largest and lies underneath the 
inferior nasal concha.
2. Middle meatus lies underneath the middle concha. It 
presents following features:
(a) Ethmoidal bulla (bulla ethmoidalis), a round 
elevation produced by the underlying middle 
ethmoidal sinuses.
(b) Hiatus semilunaris, a deep semicircular sulcus below 
the bulla ethmoidalis.
(c) Infundibulum, a short passage at the anterior end of 
middle meatus.
3. Superior meatus is the smallest and lies below the 
superior concha.
A triangular depression, above and behind the superior 
concha is known as the sphenoethmoidal recess.
Openings (Fig. 17.7): The lateral wall of the nose has number 
of openings. These are listed in Table 17.1.
Lining of Nasal Cavity
The lining of the various regions of nasal cavity (Fig. 17.8) 
are as follows:
Vestibule: It is lined by the skin containing a large 
number of sebaceous glands and interlacing coarse 
hair—the vibrissae. As the air passes through the nostrils 
the large particles of dust in the air are trapped by the 
vibrissae.
Fig. 17.6 Features of the lateral wall of the nasal cavity.
Frontal air sinus
Agger nasi
Atrium
Limen nasi
Vestibule
Vibrissae
Superior nasal concha
Sphenoethmoidal recess
Sphenoidal air sinus
Middle nasal concha
Inferior nasal concha
Opening of 
pharyngotympanic tube
--- Page 271 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
2. Olfactory region: The upper third of the nasal cavity 
bounded above by cribriform plate of ethmoid, laterally 
by superior nasal concha and medially by upper 
one-third of the nasal septum forms the olfactory 
region. It is lined by the olfactory epithelium, which 
contains receptor cells for smell. Here mucous mem-
brane is paler in color.
3. Respiratory region: The rest of the nasal cavity (lower 
two-third) is lined by the respiratory epithelium, i.e., 
pseudostratified ciliated columnar epithelium with 
goblet cells. The respiratory mucosa is highly vascular 
and contains a large number of cavernous spaces and 
sinusoids to warm the air. In addition, it contains a 
large number of serous and mucous glands. The 
secretion of the serous glands makes the air moist while 
the secretion of the mucous glands traps the dust and 
other particles. Further, the cilia on the surface of the 
mucous membrane sweep the mucous posteriorly into 
the pharynx where it is swallowed and eliminated by 
the GIT.
N.B. Due to the presence of cilia in the epithelial lining and 
secretions of the serous and mucous glands in the nasal 
cavity, the air while passing through the nasal cavity is not 
only filtered but also moistened and humidified, a 
mechanism that protects the lower respiratory tract.
Arterial Supply of Nasal Cavity
The nasal cavity has rich arterial supply.
Fig. 17.7 Lateral wall of the nose with conchae removed showing openings of various sinuses and nasolacrimal duct.
Frontonasal duct
Infundibulum
Opening of
frontal air sinus
Sphenoidal air sinus
Opening of middle
ethmoidal air sinus
Hiatus semilunaris
Opening of 
pharyngotympanic tube
Opening of maxillary
air sinus
Opening of anterior
ethmoid air sinus
Opening of 
nasolacrimal duct
Bulla
ethmoidalis
Frontal air sinus
Opening of sphenoidal
air sinus
Opening of posterior
ethmoidal air sinus
Table 17.1 The openings in the lateral wall of the nose
Sites
Openings
Sphenoethmoidal recess
Opening of the sphenoidal air sinus
Superior meatus
Opening of the posterior ethmoidal air sinuses
Middle meatus
• On bulla
• In hiatus semilunaris
– Anterior part
– Middle part
– Posterior part
Opening of the middle ethmoidal air sinuses
Opening of the frontal air sinus
Opening of the anterior ethmoidal air sinuses
Opening of the maxillary air sinus
Inferior meatus
Opening of the nasolacrimal duct (in the anterior part of meatus)
Fig. 17.8 Lining of the nasal cavity.
Olfactory region lined by 
olfactory epithelium
Respiratory
region lined by 
respiratory
epithelium
Vestibule
lined by
skin
--- Page 272 ---
Nose and Paranasal Air Sinuses
Arterial Supply of Nasal Septum
The nasal septum is supplied by the following arteries 
(Fig. 17.9):
1. Septal branch of the anterior ethmoidal artery (a branch 
of ophthalmic artery).
2. Septal branch of the posterior ethmoidal artery 
(a branch of ophthalmic artery).
3. Septal branch of the sphenopalatine artery (a branch of 
maxillary artery).
4. Septal branch of the greater palatine artery (a branch of 
maxillary artery).
5. Septal branch of the superior labial artery (a branch of 
facial artery).
Little’s area: It is an area in the anteroinferior part of the 
nasal septum just above the vestibule. It is highly vascular. 
Here the septal branches of the anterior ethmoidal 
sphenopalatine, greater palatine, and superior labial 
arteries anastomose to form a vascular plexus called 
Kiesselbach’s plexus. This area of nasal septum is the 
commonest site of epistaxis (nose bleeding) in children 
and young adults usually due to finger nail trauma 
following picking of the nose.
Clinical correlation
Arterial Supply of Lateral Wall
The arterial supply (Fig. 17.10) of the various parts of the 
lateral wall is as follows:
1. Anterosuperior quadrant, by the anterior ethmoidal 
artery, a branch of ophthalmic artery.
2. Anteroinferior quadrant, by branches of facial and 
greater palatine arteries.
3. Posterosuperior quadrant, by sphenopalatine artery, a 
branch of maxillary artery.
4. Posteroinferior quadrant, by branches of greater palatine 
artery, which pierces the perpendicular plate of palatine.
Venous Drainage of Nasal Cavity
The veins draining the nasal cavity form plexus beneath the 
mucosa and in general accompany the arteries. The veins of 
nasal cavity drain into facial vein, pterygoid venous plexus, 
and pharyngeal venous plexus.
N.B.
• The submucous venous plexus is more marked in the 
region of little’s area.
• The retrocolumellar vein runs vertically downwards, 
crosses the floor of nasal cavity to join the venous plexus 
on the lateral wall. This is the common site of venous 
bleeding in young individuals.
Fig. 17.9 Arterial supply of the nasal septum.
Sphenopalatine
artery
Posterior ethmoidal artery
Anterior
ethmoidal
artery
Little’s area
Superior labial
branch of facial
artery
Greater
palatine artery
Anterosuperior quadrant
Anterior ethmoidal artery
Sphenopalatine artery
Greater palatine artery
Posteroinferior quadrant
Branches of greater palatine artery
(which pierces the perpendicular plate of palatine)
Posterosuperior quadrant
Anteroinferior quadrant
Branches of facial artery
Branches of greater palatine artery
Fig. 17.10 Arterial supply of the lateral wall.
--- Page 273 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
Lymphatic Drainage of Nasal Cavity
Lymph from anterior half of nasal cavity (both medial and 
lateral walls) is drained into submandibular lymph nodes and 
from posterior half into retropharyngeal lymph nodes.
Nerve Supply of Nasal Cavity
The nasal cavity is supplied by the following nerves:
1. Olfactory nerves: They carry sense of smell from olfactory 
region of nasal cavity (for details see Chapter 22).
2. Nerves of general sensation: These are:
(a) anterior ethmoidal nerve,
(b) branches of sphenopalatine ganglion, and 
(c) branches of infraorbital nerve.
They carry sensations of pain, touch, and 
temperature from respiratory region and vestibule of 
nasal cavity.
3. Autonomic 
nerves: 
Both 
parasympathetic 
sympathetic fibres supplying nasal cavity are derived 
from Vidian’s nerve (nerve of pterygoid canal) through 
pterygopalatine ganglion.
The parasympathetic fibres supply nasal glands and 
control nasal secretion.
The sympathetic fibres, on stimulation, cause 
vasoconstriction.
Rhinitis: It is the inflammation of mucus membrane lining 
the nasal cavity. The hypertrophy of mucosa over inferior 
concha is a common feature of allergic rhinitis. Clinically it 
presents as: nasal blockage, sneezing, and water discharge 
from nose (rhinorrhea).
The excessive rhinorrhea due to vasomotor and allergic 
rhinitis can be controlled by sectioning the Vidian nerve.
Clinical correlation
Nerve Supply of Nasal Septum (Fig. 17.11)
The nasal septum receives supply from the following nerves:
1. Olfactory nerves—supply the upper part (one-third) just 
below the cribriform plate.
2. Internal nasal branch of the anterior ethmoidal nerve, a 
branch from nasociliary—supplies the anterosuperior 
part.
3. Nasopalatine nerve, a branch of pterygopalatine 
ganglion—supplies the posteroinferior part.
4. Medial 
posterior 
superior 
nasal 
branches 
pterygopalatine ganglion—supply the posterosuperior 
part.
5. Nasal branch of greater palatine nerve—supplies the 
posterior part.
6. Anterior superior alveolar nerve, a branch of maxillary 
nerve—supplies the anteroinferior part.
Nerve Supply of Lateral Wall
The following nerves supply (Fig. 17.12) the different parts 
of the lateral wall:
1. Olfactory nerves—supply the upper part (one-third) just 
below the cribriform plate of ethmoid up to the superior 
concha.
2. Anterior ethmoidal nerve (from ophthalmic)—supplies 
the anterosuperior quadrant.
3. Anterior superior alveolar nerve, a branch of 
infraorbital nerve (from maxillary)—supplies the 
anteroinferior quadrant.
4. Posterior superior lateral branches, of pterygopalatine 
ganglion—supply posterosuperior quadrant.
5. Nasal branches of greater palatine nerve, (from 
pterygopalatine 
ganglion)—supply 
posteroinferior 
quadrant.
Fig. 17.11 Nerve supply of the nasal septum.
Posterosuperior part
Medial posterior superior 
nasal branches of 
pterygopalatine ganglion
Nasopalatine nerve from
pterygopalatine ganglion
Posteroinferior part
Olfactory nerves
Anterosuperior part
Anterior ethmoidal nerve
(internal nasal branch)
Anterior superior alveolar nerve
Anteroinferior part
--- Page 274 ---
Nose and Paranasal Air Sinuses
Examination of the nasal cavity (Rhinoscopy): The nasal 
cavity can be examined in the living individual either through 
the nostril (anterior rhinoscopy) or through the pharynx 
(posterior rhinoscopy).
(a) Anterior rhinoscopy: It is carried out by inserting a 
nasal speculum through a nostril. The following features 
are visualized by this method:
– Middle and inferior conchae.
– Superior middle and inferior meatuses.
– Nasal septum.
– Floor of the nasal cavity.
(b) Posterior rhinoscopy: It is carried out by inserting a 
mirror into the pharynx (Fig. 17.13A). The following 
features can be visualized by this method (Fig. 17.13B):
Clinical correlation
Fig. 17.12 Nerve supply of the lateral wall of the nose.
Anterosuperior quadrant
Anterior ethmoidal nerve
Posterosuperior quadrant
Posterior superior lateral
nasal branches of
pterygopalatine ganglion
Olfactory nerves
Nasal branches of
greater palatine nerve
Posteroinferior quadrant
Anterior superior
alveolar nerve
Anteroinferior quadrant
Superior concha
Nasal septum
Choanae
Mirror
Nasopharynx
Uvula
Middle concha
Tubal elevation
Soft palate
Inferior concha
Fig. 17.13 Posterior rhinoscopy: A, showing placement of mirror in the nasopharynx; B, structures seen in the mirror.
– Choanae.
– Conchae.
– Posterior border of the nasal septum.
PARANASAL AIR SINUSES
The paranasal air sinuses are air-containing cavities in the 
bones around the nasal cavity. The paranasal air sinuses 
develop as mucosal diverticula of the main nasal cavity 
invading the adjacent bones. They are lined by a 
pseudostratified ciliated columnar epithelium as in the 
nasal cavity (Fig. 17.14).
--- Page 275 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
There are four paranasal air sinuses on each side and are 
named after the bones containing them, viz.
1. Frontal air sinuses present in the frontal bone.
2. Ethmoidal air sinuses present in the ethmoid bone.
3. Maxillary air sinuses present in the maxilla.
4. Sphenoidal air sinuses present in the sphenoid bone.
The paranasal air sinuses are arranged in pairs except the 
ethmoidal air sinuses, which are arranged in three groups, 
viz. anterior, middle, and posterior on each side.
The orbit of eye serves as a landmark to appreciate the 
location of various paranasal air sinuses.
The relationship of the paranasal sinuses to the orbit 
(Fig. 17.15) is as follows:
 the frontal air sinus above,
 the maxillary air sinus below,
 the ethmoidal air sinus medial to, and
 the sphenoidal air sinus behind the orbit.
The sinuses exhibit two spurts of growth, viz:
1. First around 7–8 years (during the eruption of the teeth).
2. Second at puberty.
N.B. All the paranasal air sinuses are present in rudimentary 
form at birth except the frontal air sinuses, which start 
developing 2 or 3 years after birth.
FUNCTIONS
Paranasal air sinuses perform the following functions:
1. Make the skull lighter.
2. Add resonance to the voice.
3. Act as air conditioning chambers by adding humidity 
and temperature to the inspired air.
4. Aid in the growth of facial skeleton after birth.
Sinusitis: The infection of a paranasal air sinus is called 
sinusitis. Clinically it presents as: headache and persistent 
thick purulent discharge from the nose.
In standard radiological images, the normal paranasal air 
sinuses are radiolucent, whereas diseased paranasal 
sinuses show varying degree of opacity. The newer imaging 
techniques, viz. CT scan provide very clear images of the 
sinuses, which significantly aid in diagnosis (Fig. 17.16).
Clinical correlation
CLASSIFICATION
Clinically the sinuses are divided into the following two 
main groups:
Fig. 17.14 Positions of paranasal air sinuses on the surface: A, front view; B, side view.
Ethmoidal
air sinuses
Frontal
air sinus
Sphenoidal
air sinus
Ethmoidal
air sinus
Frontal
air sinuses
Maxillary
air sinus
Sphenoidal
air sinus
Maxillary
air sinus
Fig. 17.15 Schematic diagram to show the location of 
various paranasal sinuses in relation to the orbit.
Ethmoidal
air sinuses
Nasal
septum
Sphenoidal air sinuses
Frontal
air sinus
Maxillary
air sinus
Orbit
--- Page 276 ---
Nose and Paranasal Air Sinuses
1. Anterior group: It includes those sinuses, which drain 
into the middle meatus, viz. frontal, anterior and middle 
ethmoidal, and maxillary sinuses.
2. Posterior group: It includes those sinuses, which do not 
drain into the middle meatus, viz. posterior ethmoidal 
and sphenoidal air sinuses.
FRONTAL AIR SINUSES
The frontal air sinus (two in number) lies between the 
inner and outer tables of the frontal bone deep to medial 
part of the superciliary arch. They are triangular in shape. 
The right and left sinuses are usually unequal in size and 
rarely symmetrical. The right is frequently larger than the 
left and separated from it by a septum.
Each sinus drains into the anterior part of the hiatus 
semilunaris of the middle meatus through frontonasal 
duct.
Measurements
Vertical: 3 cm.
Transverse: 2.5 mm.
Anteroposterior: 1.8 cm.
Relations
Anterior wall is related to: superciliary arch of forehead.
Posterior wall is related to: meninges and frontal lobe of the 
brain.
Inferior wall is related to: roof of nose, roof of orbit (medial 
part), and ethmoidal air cells.
Nerve Supply
It is by supraorbital nerve.
Frontal sinusitis: Infection of frontal air sinus may spread 
posteriorly into the anterior cranial fossa causing frontal 
lobe abscess or downwards into the orbit leading to orbital 
cellulitis.
The pain of frontal sinusitis is usually severe and localized 
over the affected sinus (frontal headache). It shows 
characteristic periodicity, i.e., it starts on waking, gradually 
increases and reaches its peak by about midday and then 
starts subsiding. It is also referred to as 'office headache' 
because of its presence during office hours.
Clinical correlation
MAXILLARY SINUS (ANTRUM OF HIGHMORE)
It is the largest of paranasal air sinuses and is present in the 
body of maxilla.
It drains into the hiatus semilunaris (posterior part) of 
the middle meatus.
Development
The maxillary sinus is first to develop. It appears about the 
4th month of intrauterine life as an out-pouching from the 
mucous membrane lining the lateral wall of the nasal cavity. 
It is rudimentary at birth, enlarges rapidly during 6–7 years 
and becomes fully developed at puberty after the eruption of 
permanent teeth.
Measurements
Vertical: 3.5 cm.
Transverse: 2.5 cm.
Anteroposterior: 3.25 cm.
Shape
It is pyramidal in shape with the base directed medially 
towards the lateral wall of the nose and its apex laterally 
towards the zygomatic bone.
Relations (Fig. 17.17)
Roof is formed by the floor of the orbit. The infraorbital 
nerve and artery traverse the roof in a bony canal.
Floor (very small) is formed by the alveolar process of 
maxilla and lies about 1.25 cm below the floor of the nasal 
cavity. The level of the floor corresponds to the level of the 
ala of nose. Normally the roots of the first and second molar 
Fig. 17.16 Coronal CT scan showing ethmoidal and 
maxillary air sinuses. (Source: Fig. 8.281, Page 1029, Gray's 
Anatomy for Students, Richard L Drake, Wayne Vogl, Adam 
WM Mitchell. Copyright Elsevier Inc. 2005, All rights 
reserved.)
Orbit
Cranial cavity
Left
Right
Ethmoidal air sinus
Maxillary air sinus
--- Page 277 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
teeth project into the floor producing elevations but some-
times roots of the first and second premolars, third molar, 
and rarely even that of canine may project into the floor. 
Sometimes roots of teeth are separated from the sinus only 
by a thin layer of mucous lining.
Base is formed by the lateral wall of the nose. It possesses 
the opening or ostium of the sinus in its upper part, i.e., close 
to the roof, a disadvantageous position for natural drainage.
In the disarticulated skull, the base of maxillary sinus 
(medial surface of the body of maxilla) presents a large 
opening—the maxillary hiatus, which is reduced in size by 
the following bones (Fig. 17.5):
1. Uncinate process of ethmoid, from above.
2. Descending process of lacrimal, from in front.
3. Ethmoidal process of inferior nasal concha, from below.
4. Perpendicular plate of palatine from behind.
N.B. The nasolacrimal duct lies in the osseous canal formed 
by the maxilla, the lacrimal bone and inferior nasal concha. It 
opens into the inferior meatus beneath the inferior nasal 
concha.
Apex extends into the zygomatic process of maxilla.
Anterior wall is formed by the anterior surface of the body 
of maxilla and is related to infraorbital plexus of nerves. 
Within this wall runs the anterior superior alveolar nerve in a 
curved bony canal called canalis sinuosus.
Posterior wall is formed by the infratemporal surface of 
the maxilla, separating the sinus from the infratemporal and 
pterygopalatine fossae. It is pierced by the posterior superior 
alveolar nerves and vessels.
Opening
Maxillary sinuses open in the hiatus semilunaris of middle 
meatus near the roof of the sinus.
Arterial Supply
It is by the anterior, middle, and posterior superior alveolar 
arteries from maxillary and infraorbital arteries.
Lymphatic Drainage
The sinus drains into submandibular lymph nodes.
Nerve Supply
Maxillary sinuses are supplied by the anterior, middle, and 
posterior superior alveolar nerves from the maxillary and 
infraorbital nerves.
• Maxillary sinusitis: Maxillary sinus is most commonly 
infected of all the sinuses due to following reasons:
– Infection can reach into this sinus from infected nose 
(viral rhinitis), carious upper premolar and molar teeth, 
especially molars, and infected frontal and anterior 
ethmoidal sinuses.
– Being most dependent part, it acts as a secondary 
reservoir for pus from frontal air sinus through 
frontonasal duct and hiatus semilunaris.
– Pain of maxillary sinusitis is referred to the upper teeth 
and infraorbital skin due to common innervation by the 
maxillary nerve.
• Drainage of maxillary sinus: The opening of this sinus is 
unfortunately located in the upper part of the lateral wall of 
nose, which is a disadvantageous site for adequate natu-
ral drainage. Surgically, maxillary sinus is drained in the 
following two ways:
– Antral puncture (antrostomy) by using trocar and 
cannula, which are passed below the inferior nasal 
concha in an outward and backward direction 
(Fig. 17.18).
– Fenestrating the antrum through canine fossa in the 
gingivolabial sulcus (Caldwell–Luc operation).
• Carcinoma of maxillary sinus: It arises from the mucous 
lining of the sinus. The signs and symptoms produced by 
the invasion of the carcinoma can be easily remembered 
anatomically:
– The upward invasion into the orbit displaces the 
eyeball causing proptosis (protrusion of eyeball) and 
diplopia (double vision).
Involvement of infraorbital nerve produces pain and 
anesthesia in the skin over the face below the orbit.
– The downward invasion into the floor produces visible 
bulge or even ulceration of palatal roof of the oral cavity.
– The medial invasion encroaches the nasal cavity 
causing obstruction and epistaxis. The obstruction of 
nasolacrimal duct in this wall produces epiphora 
(overflow of tears).
– The lateral invasion produces swelling on the face and 
palpable mass in the gingivolabial fold (groove).
– Backward (posterior) invasion may involve the palatine 
nerves leading to severe referred pain to the upper 
teeth.
Clinical correlation
Fig. 17.17 Relations of maxillary sinus.
Ethmoidal
air sinuses
Crista galli
Antral ostium
Zygomatic
process of
maxilla
Maxillary antrum
Alveolar process
Hard palate
--- Page 278 ---
Nose and Paranasal Air Sinuses
ETHMOIDAL SINUSES
The ethmoidal air sinuses are made up of a number of air 
cells present within the labyrinth of ethmoidal bone, thus 
they are located between the upper part of the lateral nasal 
wall and the orbit.
They are divided into the following three groups:
1. Anterior, consisting of up to 11 cells.
2. Middle, consisting of 1–3, usually three cells.
3. Posterior, consisting of 1–7 cells.
The first two groups—anterior and middle—drain into the 
middle meatus (anterior opens in the hiatus semilunaris and 
middle on the surface of bull ethmoidalis) and the posterior
into posterior part of superior meatus.
Ethmoidal sinusitis: It is often associated with infection of 
other sinuses. The pain is localized over the bridge of nose 
medial to the eye.
Clinical correlation
Fig. 17.18 Antral puncture (antrostomy).
Bulla ethmoidalis
Ostium of
maxillary sinus
Pus in the
maxillary sinus
Trocar and
canula
Inferior concha
Nasal cavity
The ethmoidal sinuses are separated from the medial 
wall of the orbit only by a very thin plate of bone called 
lamina papyracea, therefore the infection from these 
sinuses can easily spread into the orbit producing orbital 
cellulitis.
SPHENOIDAL SINUSES
The right and left sphenoidal sinuses lie within the body of 
the sphenoid bone above and behind the nasal cavity. They 
are separated from each other by a bony septum. The two 
sinuses are usually asymmetrical. Each sinus drains into the 
sphenoethmoidal recess of the nasal cavity.
Measurements
Vertical: 2 cm.
Transverse: 1.5 cm.
Anteroposterior: 2 cm.
Relations
Above: 
Pituitary gland and optic chiasma.
Below: 
Roof of the nasopharynx.
Lateral: Cavernous sinus and internal carotid artery (on 
each side).
Behind: Pons and medulla oblongata.
In front: Sphenoethmoidal recess.
Sphenoidal sinusitis: Isolated sphenoidal sinusitis is rare. 
It is usually a part of pansinusitis or is associated with the 
infection of posterior ethmoidal sinuses.
The infection of sphenoidal air sinuses spreading upwards 
may affect the pituitary gland and optic chiasma.
Clinical correlation
--- Page 279 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
Golden Facts to Remember
  Whole nasal cavity is respiratory in function except
Upper one-fourth, which is olfactory in function
  All the conchae are parts of ethmoid bone except
Inferior nasal concha, which is an independent bone
  Commonest site of nose bleeding
Little’s area
  Artery of nose bleeding
Septal branch of the sphenopalatine artery
  Rhinologist’s artery
Septal branch of the sphenopalatine artery
  Woodruff’s area
Vascular area under the posterior end of inferior 
concha. It is the site of posterior epistaxis
  Largest paranasal air sinus
Maxillary air sinus
  First sinus that can be visualized radiologically 
after birth
Maxillary air sinus (4–5 months after birth)
  Most commonly infected paranasal air sinus
Maxillary sinus
  All the paranasal air sinuses are present at birth 
except
Frontal air sinuses, which start developing at the 
age of 2 years
  Most easily naturally drained paranasal air sinus
Frontal air sinus
  Most deeply located paranasal air sinuses
Sphenoidal air sinuses
  Only bone in the body, made up solely of spongy 
bone
Inferior nasal concha
A 12-year-old boy while playing in the school ground 
during the lunch break suddenly started bleeding from 
nose. His mates took him to the Principal’s office where 
teachers tried to stop the bleeding by pinching the nose 
and pouring cold water on the nose. When bleeding 
did not stop, the student was taken to the nearby 
dispensary. The doctor packed his nose to stop bleeding 
and sent back the boy to the school.
Questions
1. What is the commonest cause of nose bleeding in 
children?
2. What is Little’s area and which arteries anastomose 
in this area?
3. Which artery is called the artery of nose bleeding?
Answers
1. In vast majority of children, nose bleeding occurs 
because of digital trauma to the anastomosis of 
arterioles and veins (Kiesselbach’s plexus) in Little’s 
area.
2. Area on nasal septum just above the nasal vestibule. 
The arteries anastomosing in this area are septal 
branches of the sphenopalatine, greater palatine, 
anterior ethmoidal, and superior labial arteries.
3. Septal branch of the sphenopalatine artery.
Clinical Case Study
--- Page 280 ---
CHAPTER
The ear is the organ of hearing and plays an important role 
in maintaining the balance (equilibrium) of the body. The 
ear is divided into three parts (Fig. 18.1), viz.
1. External ear.
2. Middle ear.
3. Internal ear.
The external ear consists of the auricle or pinna and external 
auditory meatus at the medial end of which lies the tympanic 
membrane or ear drum, separating the external ear from the 
middle ear. The middle ear or tympanic cavity is a small 
air-filled space within the petrous part of the temporal bone 
containing the auditory ossicles. It communicates with 
the nasopharynx through auditory tube. By its medial wall, 
the middle ear adjoins the internal ear. The internal ear 
consists of a bony labyrinth, a complicated space, also in the 
petrous part of the temporal bone containing fluid-filled 
membranous labyrinth. The membranous labyrinth 
contains sensory receptors for hearing and balancing.
The sensations of hearing and balancing from these 
receptors are carried by vestibulocochlear nerve to the 
cerebral cortex for interpretation.
Fig. 18.1 The ear and its subdivisions (external, middle, and internal ear).
Vestibulocochlear
nerve
Semicircular
canals
Internal acoustic
meatus
Pinna
Cochlea
Bony part
Auditory tube
Cartilaginous part
Cartilaginous
part
External
auditory meatus
Bony
part
Tympanic
membrane
Tympanic
cavity
Bony
labyrinth
Concha
Nasopharynx
External ear
Middle ear
Internal ear
--- Page 281 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
EXTERNAL EAR
The external ear consists of (a) pinna or auricle and 
(b) external auditory meatus, which are concerned with 
collection and transmission of sound waves to the 
tympanic membrane, respectively.
AURICLE/PINNA
The auricle is trumpet-like undulating projection on the 
side of the head (Fig. 18.2). The entire pinna except its 
lobule is made up of a single piece of crumpled yellow 
elastic cartilage covered with skin (Fig. 18.2B). The lobule of 
pinna is made of fibrofatty tissue covered with skin. The 
auricular cartilage is continuous with the cartilage of the 
external auditory meatus.
Features
The auricle presents two surfaces: lateral and medial.
The lateral surface of auricle (Fig. 18.2A) displays following 
elevations and depressions:
1. Concha, a large depression that leads into the external 
auditory meatus. It is guarded in front by a triangular 
flap of cartilage, the tragus.
2. Helix forms a prominent peripheral rim of the pinna. It 
consists of two limbs—anterior and posterior. An 
anterior limb ends as crus of helix, which divides the 
concha into smaller upper and larger lower parts. The 
posterior limb ends below as flabby ear lobe and its 
upper end sometimes presents a small elevation called 
Darwin’s tubercle. It is probably erroneously thought to 
represent the vestige of the pointed part of the quadruped 
ear.
3. Antihelix is another prominent ridge present in front 
and parallel to the posterior part of helix, partly encircling 
the concha. Its upper end divides into two crura enclosing 
a triangular depression called triangular fossa. The narrow 
gutter between the helix and antihelix is called scaphoid
fossa.
4. Tragus is a small triangular flap in front of concha.
5. Antitragus is a small elevation opposite to tragus from 
which it is separated by an intertragic notch.
6. Cymba conchae is a small area of concha above the crus 
of helix. Clinically it is important as it corresponds to 
the suprameatal triangle (McEwen’s triangle).
7. Lobule of the ear hangs below the antitragus as a large 
skin covered flap of fibrofatty tissue.
N.B.
• There is no cartilage between tragus and crus and the 
gap between the two is called incisura terminalis.
• The thick hair on pinna particularly on tragus in male 
represents Y-linked inheritance.
• The pinna collects and directs the sound waves to the 
external auditory meatus.
The medial/cranial surface of (pinna) presents the following 
features:
1. Eminentia concha, which corresponds to the depression 
of the concha.
2. Eminentia triangularis, which corresponds to the 
triangular fossa between the crura of the antihelix.
• Pinna is a source of several graft materials for the 
surgeons.
• The lobule of ear is commonly pierced for wearing earrings.
• For surgery of external auditory meatus, the incision is 
made in the region of incisura terminalis as it will not cut 
through the cartilage.
Clinical correlation
Muscles
The muscles of the auricle are divided into two groups: 
extrinsic and intrinsic. They are rudimentary in humans.
Scaphoid
fossa
Darwin’s
tubercle
Helix
Antihelix
Cymba
conchae
Concha
Lobule
Antitragus
Intertragic notch
Tragus
External acoustic
meatus
Crus of helix
Triangular fossa
Crura of antihelix
Helix
Spine of helix
Incisura terminalis
Tragus
Antitragus
Fibrofatty tissue of
lobule
Tail of helix
Fig. 18.2 Auricle: A, features on the lateral surface of the 
auricle; B, cartilage of the auricle.
--- Page 282 ---
The extrinsic muscles pass from scalp or skull to the 
auricle. They are as follows:
1. Auricularis anterior.
2. Auricularis superior.
3. Auricularis posterior.
The anterior and superior muscles arise from epicranial 
aponeurosis and are inserted into the upper part of the helix 
and upper part of the cranial surface of the auricle, 
respectively. The auricularis posterior arises from the 
mastoid process and gets inserted into eminentia concha.
The intrinsic muscles are small muscular slips, which pass 
between the cartilaginous parts of the auricle.
Actions
The extrinsic muscles may play a role in positioning of the 
auricle to catch the sound, while intrinsic muscles may 
change the shape of the auricle. Such movements are rarely 
seen in human beings. However in animals they modify the 
shape of the pinna.
Skin
The skin covering the auricle is closely adherent to the 
underlying cartilage and fibrofatty tissue. Sometimes coarse 
hair projects out of the tragus, antitragus, intertragic notch, 
and helix in elderly males. The hairy pinna is an expression 
of Y-linked genes.
Arterial Supply
1. The cranial surface and posterior part of the lateral 
surface is supplied by the posterior auricular branch of 
the external carotid artery.
2. The anterior part of the lateral surface is supplied by the 
superficial temporal artery.
N.B. Few branches of occipital artery supply the upper part 
of the cranial surface.
Venous Drainage
The veins accompany the arteries and drain into superficial 
temporal and external jugular veins.
Lymphatic Drainage
The lymph from auricle drains into:
1. Preauricular (parotid) lymph nodes.
2. Mastoid lymph nodes.
3. Upper group of deep cervical lymph nodes.
Nerve Supply
Motor supply: All the extrinsic and intrinsic muscles of the 
auricle are supplied by the facial nerve. The auricularis 
anterior and auricularis superior are supplied by the 
temporal branch of the facial nerve, while auricularis 
posterior is supplied by the posterior auricular branch of 
the facial nerve.
Sensory supply (Fig. 18.3)
1. Lateral (facial) surface (Fig. 18.3A)
(a) Lower one-third, by great auricular nerve (C2, C3).
(b) Upper two-third, by auriculotemporal nerve [(a 
branch of mandibular division of the trigeminal 
nerve (CNV)].
(c) Concha, by auricular branch of the vagus 
(Alderman’s nerve) nerve (CNX).
2. Medial (cranial) surface (Fig. 18.3B)
(a) Lower one-third, by great auricular nerve (C2, C3).
(b) Upper two-third, by lesser occipital nerve (C2).
(c) Eminentia conchae, by auricular branch of the 
vagus.
Involvement of pinna in herpes zoster of geniculate 
ganglion (Ramsay Hunt syndrome): Clinically, it is 
acknowledged that a few fibres of the facial nerve 
accompany the auricular branch of vagus and supply the 
skin in the region of concha and eminentia conchae, as 
vesicles are seen in these regions during involvement of the 
geniculate ganglion of the facial nerve by herpes zoster 
virus. The communication between the auricular branch of 
vagus and facial nerves takes place within the petrous 
temporal bone.
Clinical correlation
EXTERNAL AUDITORY MEATUS
The external auditory meatus (syn. external acoustic meatus) 
extends from the bottom of the concha to the tympanic 
membrane and measures about 24 mm along its posterior 
Auriculotemporal
nerve (CNV)
Auricular branch of
vagus (CNX)
Great auricular
nerve (C2, C3)
Lesser occipital
nerve (C2)
Auricular branch of
vagus nerve (CNX)
Fig. 18.3 Sensory supply of the auricle: A, lateral surface; 
B, medial surface.
--- Page 283 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
wall. Note that it is not a straight tube but it has a typical 
S-shaped course. Its outer part is directed upwards, 
backwards, and medially (UBM), whereas its inner part is 
directed downwards, forwards, and medially (DFM). 
Therefore, to examine the tympanic membrane the pinna has 
to be pulled upwards, backwards, and laterally, to bring the two 
parts in alignment.
Parts
The external auditory meatus is divided into two parts: 
cartilaginous and bony.
The cartilaginous part forms the outer one-third (8 mm) of 
the meatus. The cartilage is the continuation of the cartilage 
of the auricle. The skin covering the cartilaginous part is thick, 
and contains hair and ceruminous (pilosebaceous) glands, 
which secrete ear wax.
• Since the hairs are confined to the outer part of the 
meatus, the furuncles (infection of hair follicles) develop 
only in this part.
• To examine external auditory meatus and tympanic 
membrane, the pinna is pulled upwards, backwards, and 
laterally (vide supra) in adults, while in infants it is pulled 
downwards and backwards. This is because in infants the 
bony part of external auditory meatus is not developed 
and tympanic membrane is directed mainly downwards.
Clinical correlation
The bony part forms the inner two-third (16 mm) of the 
external auditory meatus. The skin lining the bony part of 
meatus is thin and continuous with the cuticular layer of the 
tympanic membrane. It is devoid of hair and ceruminous 
glands. About 4 mm lateral to the tympanic membrane (about 
20 mm deep to concha), the bony meatus presents a narrowing 
called isthmus. The foreign body lodged medial to isthmus 
gets impacted and are difficult to remove.
Sometimes the anterior wall of bony part presents a 
foramen (foramen of Huschke), permitting infection back 
and forth from parotid gland. This foramen is normally 
present in children up to the age of 4 years.
In the newborn, the bony canal is not developed and is 
represented by a tympanic ring of bone. Consequently the 
external auditory meatus is shorter in children, and therefore, 
deep insertion of ear speculum may damage the tympanic 
membrane.
Arterial Supply
The external auditory meatus is supplied by the following 
arteries:
1. Posterior auricular artery, a branch of the external 
carotid artery.
2. Deep auricular artery, a branch of first part of the 
maxillary artery.
3. Anterior tympanic artery, a branch of first part of the 
maxillary artery.
Nerve Supply
1. Roof and anterior wall are supplied by the auriculo-
temporal nerve.
2. Floor and posterior wall are supplied by the auricular 
branch of vagus (note that it is the only cutaneous 
branch of the vagus nerve).
• The infection and boils of the external auditory meatus 
cause very little swelling but are very painful because the 
skin lining is firmly adhered to the underlying cartilage and 
bone.
• Ear wax: It prevents the injury of the lining epithelium of 
the external auditory meatus from water and the damage 
of tympanic membrane by trapping the insects. The excess 
of ear wax interfering with hearing is removed by syringing. 
The irritation of auricular branch of vagus during syringing 
may reflexly produce persistent cough called ear cough, 
vomiting, and even death due to sudden cardiac inhibition.
• The Aldermen were the individuals in ancient Rome, who 
were very fond of excessive eating and used to stimulate 
their jaded appetite by dropping cold water or spirit behind 
the ear as this could reflexly stimulate gastric peristalsis 
due to supply of this area by the vagus nerve which also 
supplies motor innervation to the GIT.
Clinical correlation
Development
The external auditory meatus develops as an ectodermal 
invagination of first pharyngeal cleft. It becomes filled with 
ectodermal cells forming a solid mass called meatal plug,
which is canalized before birth. The auricle develops from 
six mesodermal tubercles around the external opening of 
the first pharyngeal cleft. The failure of canalization of 
meatal plug results in atresia of the external auditory 
meatus, while failure of fusion of tubercles will give rise to 
accessory auricles.
TYMPANIC MEMBRANE
The tympanic membrane (or ear drum) is a thin (0.1 mm 
thick) semitransparent membrane, which forms the partition 
between external acoustic meatus and middle ear. It is oval, 
measuring 9–10 mm in length, and 8–9 mm in width. It is 
placed obliquely making an angle of about 55° with the floor 
of the external acoustic meatus. The tympanic membrane 
faces downwards, forwards, and laterally as though to catch 
the sounds reflected from the ground. Consequently the 
anterior wall and the floor of external auditory meatus are 
longer than the posterior wall and the roof.
--- Page 284 ---
Structure
The tympanic membrane is made of three layers (Fig. 18.4); 
from lateral to medial these are as follows:
1. Outer cuticular layer of stratified squamous epithelium, 
which is continuous with the skin lining the external 
auditory, meatus.
2. Middle fibrous layer, which encloses the handle of the 
malleus. It contains outer radiating and inner circular 
fibres.
3. Inner mucosal layer is lined by low columnar epithelium, 
which is continuous with the mucous lining of the 
middle, ear.
Parts
The tympanic membrane is divided into two parts: 
pars tensa and pars flaccida.
Pars tensa forms most of the tympanic membrane. Its 
periphery is thickened to form a fibrocartilaginous rim 
called annulus tympanicus, which fits into the tympanic 
sulcus. The fibrocartilaginous rim presents a notch above. 
From the margins of the notch the anterior and posterior 
malleolar folds in mucous membrane of tympanic cavity 
pass to gain attachment to the lateral process of the malleus. 
The handle of the malleus is firmly attached to the inner 
surface of the pars tensa. This part is rendered tough by the 
inward pull of the tensor tympani muscle, attached to the 
root of handle of the malleus and radial fibres.
Pars flaccida (Shrapnell’s membrane) is a small triangu-
lar area above the lateral process of malleus between anterior 
and posterior malleolar folds (now called malleal folds). This 
part is thin and lax because intermediate fibrous layer here is 
replaced by loose areolar tissue. It appears slightly pinkish.
Surfaces
Lateral surface of the tympanic membrane is concave 
towards the meatus and directed downwards, forwards, and 
laterally.
Medial surface is convex and bulges towards the middle 
ear. The point of maximum convexity is called umbo 
(Fig. 18.5). When the tympanic membrane is illuminated for 
inspection, the concavity of the membrane produces a ‘cone
of light’ radiating from the umbo over the anteroinferior 
quadrant. This surface receives the attachment of malleus up 
to the center of the membrane. Here the handle of the 
malleus is crossed medially by chorda tympani nerve, which 
runs forwards between the fibrous and mucosal layer at the 
junction of pars flaccida and pars tensa.
Arterial Supply
1. The outer surface is supplied by deep auricular artery, a 
branch from first part of maxillary artery.
2. The inner surface is supplied by (a) anterior tympanic 
artery, a branch from first part of maxillary artery, 
and (b) posterior tympanic artery, a branch from 
stylomastoid artery arising from posterior auricular 
artery.
Venous Drainage
1. Veins from outer surface drain into external jugular 
vein.
2. Veins from inner surface drain into transverse sinus and 
pterygoid venous plexus.
Fig. 18.4 Layers of the tympanic membrane.
Ring of fibrocartilage attached
to tympanic sulcus
Skin lining of
external auditory 
meatus
Mucous layer
Handle of malleus
Umbo
Fibrous layer
Mucous lining of 
middle ear
Cuticular layer
Posterior
malleolar fold
Long process of
incus (lower half)
Umbo
Pars flaccida
(Shrapnell’s
membrane)
Lateral process of
malleus
Anterior
malleolar fold
Handle of malleus
Cone of light
Handle of
malleus
Facial nerve
Tympanic
membrane
Chorda tympani
nerve
Head of malleus
Incus
Anterior
canaliculus for
chorda tympani
Petrotympanic
fissure
Long process
of incus
Posterior
canaliculus for
chorda tympani
Fig. 18.5 Tympanic membrane (schematic diagram): 
A, external surface of tympanic membrane as seen through 
otoscope: 1 = posterosuperior quadrant, 2 = anterosuperior 
quadrant, 3 = postero inferior quadrant, 4 = anteroinferior 
quadrant; B, medial surface of tympanic membrane showing 
the course of the chorda tympanic nerve.
--- Page 285 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
Nerve Supply
1. Anterior half of the lateral surface is supplied by the 
auriculotemporal nerve (V3).
2. Posterior half of the lateral surface by the auricular 
branch of vagus (CNX).
3. Medial 
surface 
tympanic 
branch 
glossopharyngeal (CNIX) through tympanic plexus.
• Perforation of the tympanic membrane: It may result 
from an external injury or middle ear infection (otitis 
media).
• Examination of tympanic membrane: Inspection of the 
tympanic membrane with an otoscope provides significant 
information about the condition of the middle ear. The 
color, curvature, presence of lesions, and position of 
malleus are features of special importance. When 
tympanic membrane is illuminated for examination, a cone 
of light is reflected in the anteroinferior quadrant of the 
membrane from umbo, the point of maximum concavity, 
which marks the attachment of the handle of the malleus. 
Since the membrane is semitranslucent, the following 
structures lying deep to it can be seen (Fig. 18.6):
– Handle of Malleus, as a yellow streak extending from 
umbo upwards and forwards.
– Lateral process of malleus, as a white prominence in 
the upper part of the streak of handle of malleus.
– Long processes of incus, as white streaks behind and 
parallel to the upper part of the handle of malleus.
– A cone of light at 5 o’clock position in anteroinferior 
quadrant.
Clinical correlation
Clinically, the tympanic membrane is divided into four 
quadrants by means of two imaginary lines passing through 
the umbo. One is drawn along the handle of the malleus and 
the other at right angle to it through the umbo.
N.B. On illumination the normal membrane looks pearly 
grey. Sometimes an incision is given in the tympanic 
membrane (myringotomy) to drain the pus from the middle 
ear. The incision is usually given in the posteroinferior 
quadrant to avoid injury to the chorda tympani nerve, which 
crosses the inner aspect of the membrane in the upper part.
Development
The tympanic membrane develops from first pharyngeal 
membrane consisting, from superficial to deep, of three 
layers: ectoderm, mesoderm, and endoderm.
Therefore, the tympanic membrane also consists of three 
layers from superficial to deep these are:
1. Cuticular layer, derived from ectoderm.
2. Intermediate layer, derived from mesoderm.
3. Mucous layer, derived from endoderm.
The three layers of tympanic membrane are likened to the 
three layers of trilaminar embryonic disc.
MIDDLE EAR
The middle ear (syn. tympanum, tympanic cavity) is a 
narrow slit-like air-filled cavity within the petrous part of the 
temporal bone. The middle ear is sandwiched between the 
external and internal ear. It contains three auditory ossicles, 
which transmit sound vibrations from tympanic membrane 
in its lateral wall to the internal ear via its medial wall. The 
tympanic cavity is really the intermediate portion of a blind 
diverticulum from the respiratory mucous membrane of the 
nasopharynx. From front to back, the diverticulum consists 
of pharyngotympanic tube, tympanic cavity, and mastoid 
antrum.
In a section through long axis of petromastoid bone, the 
outline of tympanic cavity together with mastoid antrum and 
pharyngotympanic tube resembles a pistol, the nozzle being 
represented by the tube, the body by tympanic cavity, and 
handle by mastoid antrum (Fig. 18.7).
Size and Shape
The middle ear is shaped like a cube, compressed from side 
to side. In coronal section, it resembles a biconcave disc, like a 
red blood cell (Fig. 18.8).
Measurements
 Vertical diameter: 
15 mm.
 Anteroposterior diameter: 15 mm.
Fig. 18.6 Otoscopic view of the tympanic membrane. 
(Source: Fig. 8.109 B, Page 857, Gray's Anatomy for 
Students, Richard L Drake, Wayne Vogl, Adam WM Mitchell. 
Copyright Elsevier Inc., 2005, All rights reserved.)
Handle of 
malleus
Cone of light
--- Page 286 ---
 Transverse diameters
(a) At roof: 
6 mm.
(b) In the center: 
2 mm.
(c) At the floor: 
4 mm.
Communication
The middle ear communicates:
Anteriorly 
 with nasopharynx through pharyngotympanic 
tube.
Posteriorly with mastoid antrum and mastoid air cells 
through aditus to antrum called aditus ad 
antrum.
Contents of the Middle Ear
Inside the mucous lining:
1. Air.
Outside the mucous lining:
1. Three small bones called ear ossicles: malleus, incus, and 
stapes.
2. Two muscles: tensor tympani and stapedius.
3. Two nerves: chorda tympani and tympanic plexus.
4. Vessels supplying and draining the middle ear.
5. Ligaments of the ear ossicles.
N.B. The mucous membrane lining of the middle ear invests 
all the structures within it and forms several folds, which 
project into the cavity giving it a honey-comb appearance.
Thus strictly speaking, the middle ear contains only air.
Subdivisions of the Middle Ear (Fig. 18.9)
The tympanic cavity extends much beyond the limits of 
tympanic membrane, which forms its lateral boundary. It is 
divided into three parts, viz.
1. Epitympanum (attic), a part above the tympanic 
membrane containing head of malleus, body, and short 
process of incus.
2. Mesotympanum, a part opposite to tympanic membrane 
containing handle of malleus, long process of incus, and 
stapes. It is the narrowest part of the middle ear.
3. Hypotympanum, a part below the tympanic membrane.
Boundaries (Fig. 18.10)
The middle ear is likened to a six-sided box and thus presents 
six walls, namely,
1. Roof.
2. Floor.
3. Anterior wall.
4. Posterior wall.
5. Medial wall.
6. Lateral wall.
Fig. 18.8 The shape and dimensions of the middle ear cavity.
Superior wall
Inferior wall
Lateral wall
Vertical diameter
15 mm
2 mm
15 mm
Anteroposterior diameter
6 mm
4 mm
Fig. 18.9 Subdivisions of the middle ear.
Lateral attic wall
Tympanic
membrane
Epitympanum
Mesotympanum
Secondary tympanic
membrane
Hypotympanum
Fig. 18.7 Section through long axis of the petromastoid 
bone showing pharyngotympanic tube, middle ear (tympanic 
cavity), and mastoid antrum.
Mastoid antrum
Aditus ad antrum
Tegmen tympani
Pharyngotympanic
tube
Middle ear
(tympanic cavity)
Mastoid
air cells
Mastoid
process
--- Page 287 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
Roof: It is formed by a thin plate of bone called tegmen 
tympani. It separates the tympanic cavity from the middle 
cranial fossa. The tegmen tympani also extend posteriorly to 
form the roof of aditus ad antrum.
Floor: The floor is also formed by a thin plate of bone, which 
separates the tympanic cavity from the jugular bulb. 
Sometimes it is congenitally deficient and the jugular bulb 
then projects into the middle ear, being separated from cavity 
only by mucosa.
The tympanic branch of glossopharyngeal nerve pierces the 
floor between the jugular fossa and lower opening of the 
carotid canal and enters the tympanic cavity to take part in 
the formation of tympanic plexus.
Anterior wall: It is formed by a thin plate of bone. In the 
lower part it separates the cavity from internal carotid artery. 
The upper part of anterior wall presents two openings or 
canals, the upper one for the tensor tympani muscle and the 
lower one for the auditory tube.
The bony partition between the two canals extends 
backwards along the medial wall in the tympanic cavity as a 
curved lamina called processus cochleariformis.
Posterior wall: The posterior wall separates the tympanic 
cavity from mastoid antrum and mastoid air cells, and 
presents the following features:
1. Aditus ad antrum, an opening in the upper part through 
which tympanic cavity communicates with the mastoid 
antrum.
2. Fossa incudis, a small depression close to the aditus, 
lodging the short process of the incus.
3. Pyramid, a hollow conical bony projection below the 
aditus containing stapedius muscle whose tendon 
appears through its summit, passes forwards to be 
attached to the neck of the stapes.
4. Vertical part of facial canal runs in the posterior wall 
just behind the pyramid and descends up to the 
stylomastoid foramen.
5. Posterior canaliculus for chorda tympani, a small 
aperture for emergence of this nerve.
Medial wall: It separates the tympanic cavity from the inter-
nal ear; thus it is actually formed by the bony lateral wall 
of the internal ear. The medial wall presents the following 
features:
1. Promontory, a rounded prominence in the centre pro-
duced by first (basal) turn of the cochlea. The tympanic 
branch of the glossopharyngeal nerve ramifies on it to 
form tympanic plexus.
2. Oval window (fenestra vestibuli), a reniform aperture 
located above and behind the promontory. It is closed by 
the base of stapes and annular ligament.
Fig. 18.10 Schematic diagram to show the boundaries (and their relations) of the middle ear. The middle ear is likened to a 
six-sided box and its lateral side is opened out (O    oval window, P    pyramid, PC    processus cochleariformis, 
PM  promontory, R  round window, S  sinus tympani, TP  tympanic plexus).
 Prominence of lateral
semicircular canal
Aditus ad antrum
Chorda tympani nerve
Medial aspect of
tympanic membrane
Tympanic branch of
glossopharyngeal nerve
Bulb of
internal jugular vein
Temporal lobe of
cerebral hemisphere
Prominence of facial canal 
(oblique part)
Pia mater
Arachnoid mater
Dura mater
Tegmen tympani
Semicanal for
tensor tympani
Tubal opening
Internal carotid
artery
Carotid canal
Facial canal
Incus
Malleus
--- Page 288 ---
3. Round window (fenestra cochleae), a small round 
opening below and behind the promontory which in 
life, is closed by fibrous secondary tympanic membrane. 
The secondary tympanic membrane separates the 
middle ear from the scala tympani.
4. Sinus tympani, a depression behind the promontory 
between fenestra vestibuli and fenestra cochleae, which 
indicates the position of ampulla of the posterior 
semicircular canal.
5. Prominence of oblique part of the facial canal that 
extends backwards and downwards above the oval 
window until it joins the vertical part of the facial canal 
in the posterior wall of the tympanic cavity. Sometimes 
the bony covering of the facial nerve may be absent, thus 
exposing the nerve for injuries and infection.
6. Prominence of lateral semicircular canal of the internal 
ear, which is seen as a small ridge high up in the angle 
between the medial and posterior walls.
Lateral wall: Most of the lateral wall is formed by tympanic 
membrane, which separates the tympanic cavity from the 
external auditory meatus (Fig. 18.10).
The chorda tympani nerve, a branch of facial nerve passes 
across the tympanic membrane lying lateral to the long 
process of the incus and medial to the handle of the malleus.
It enters the tympanic cavity through the posterior 
canaliculus in the posterior wall and leaves through the 
anterior canaliculus medial to the petrotympanic fissure.
Infection of the middle ear (otitis media): It is common 
especially in infants and children. Infective agents reach the 
middle ear from the upper respiratory tract through 
pharyngotympanic tube. The long-standing infection leads 
to chronic suppurative otitis media (CSOM), which clinically 
presents as ear discharge and perforation of tympanic 
membrane. The spread of infection from the middle ear may 
give rise to the following clinical conditions:
– Acute mastoiditis and mastoid abscess, when infection 
spreads into mastoid antrum and mastoid air cells through 
aditus ad antrum in the posterior wall.
– Meningitis and temporal lobe abscess may occur, if infection 
spreads upwards through the thin roof (tegmen tympani).
– Lower motor neuron type of facial palsy, when infection 
erodes the papery thin bony wall of facial canal.
– Transverse and sigmoid sinus thrombosis, when infection 
spreads through the floor.
– Labyrinthitis, when infection spreads deep into medial wall. 
The labyrinthitis causes vomiting and vertigo.
– Cerebellar abscess, when infection spreads too far 
posteromedially.
Clinical correlation
Ear Ossicles
The three ear ossicles (malleus, incus, and stapes) within the 
middle ear are connected to one another by synovial joints 
and form a bony chain that extend across the tympanic 
cavity from the tympanic membrane to the oval window 
(Fig. 18.11). They conduct sound vibrations from tympanic 
membrane to the oval window and subsequently to the inner 
ear fluid.
Malleus
It resembles a hammer and, therefore, known as malleus. It 
has head, neck, handle (manubrium), a lateral process, and 
an anterior process. The head and neck lie in the 
epitympanum, whereas the handle is embedded in the 
fibrous layer of tympanic membrane. The lateral process 
forms a knob-like projection on the outer surface of the 
tympanic membrane and provides attachment to the 
anterior and posterior malleolar folds. The head of malleus 
articulates with the body of the incus forming the 
incudomalleolar joint (saddle type of synovial joint).
Incus
It resembles an anvil or a premolar tooth in shape. It 
consists of a relatively large body and two slender processes: 
a short process and a long process. The body and short 
process lie in the attic, whereas its long process hangs 
vertically behind and parallel with the handle of the 
malleus. Its bulbous tip (lentiform nodule) is directed 
medially to articulate with the head of the stapes, forming 
the incudostapedial joint (ball and socket type of synovial 
joint).
Stapes
It resembles a stirrup. It consists of head, neck, anterior 
and posterior crura, and footplate. The footplate closes the 
oval window and is attached to its margin by annular 
ligament. The features of ear ossicles are summarized in 
Table 18.1.
Fig. 18.11 Ear ossicles.
Head
Neck
Anterior
process
Lateral
process
Handle
(manubrium)
Body
Incudomalleolar joint
Malleus
Short process
Incus
Long process
Head
Foot
plate
Neck
Incudostapedial
joint
Lentiform
nodule
Anterior crus
Posterior crus
Stapes
--- Page 289 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
Intratympanic Muscles
There are two intratympanic muscles: tensor tympani and
stapedius.
The features of these muscles are enumerated in Table 18.2.
Hyperacusis: Both, tensor tympani and stapedius contract 
reflexly and simultaneously to dampen very loud sounds, 
thus preventing noise trauma to the internal ear. The 
paralysis of stapedius results in hyperacusis (an abnormally 
increased power of hearing) where even whisper appears 
as noise.
Otosclerosis: Abnormal ossification of annular ligament, 
which anchors the footplate of stapes to the oval window is 
called otosclerosis. This impedes the movements of stapes 
and causes deafness. The otosclerosis is the most common 
cause of conductive deafness in adults.
Clinical correlation
Arterial Supply
The middle ear is supplied by six arteries, viz.
1. Anterior tympanic branch of the maxillary artery.
2. Stylomastoid branch of the posterior auricular artery.
3. Petrosal branch of the middle meningeal artery, running 
along the greater petrosal nerve.
4. Superior tympanic branch of the middle meningeal 
artery, running along the canal for tensor tympani.
5. Branch from the artery of pterygoid canal.
6. Tympanic branch of the internal carotid artery.
N.B. Out of the six arteries, first two—anterior tympanic 
branch of the maxillary and stylomastoid branch of the 
posterior auricular artery are the main source of the blood 
supply.
Venous Drainage
The veins from middle ear drain into:
1. Pterygoid venous plexus, via squamotympanic fissure.
2. Superior petrosal sinus, through subarcuate fossa.
Lymphatic Drainage
The lymphatics from middle ear drain into:
1. Retropharyngeal lymph nodes.
2. Parotid lymph nodes.
3. Upper deep cervical lymph nodes.
Nerve Supply
1. Tympanic branch of glossopharyngeal nerve: It enters 
the middle ear through a canaliculus in the floor of the 
tympanic cavity and takes part in the formation of 
tympanic plexus.
It provides sensory supply to the lining of middle ear, 
antrum, and auditory tube.
Its preganglionic parasympathetic fibres supply the 
secretomotor fibres to the parotid gland.
2. Superior and inferior caroticotympanic nerves: They 
are vasomotor and derived from sympathetic plexus 
around the internal carotid artery.
3. Facial nerve: It runs in the bony canal along the medial 
and posterior walls of tympanic cavity and gives rise to 
three branches, viz.
(a) Chorda tympanic nerve, which (i) carries taste 
sensations from anterior two-third of the tongue 
except 
vallate 
papillae, 
(ii) 
provides 
secretomotor 
fibres 
submandibular 
sublingual salivary glands.
(b) Greater petrosal nerve, which provides secretomotor 
fibres to lacrimal, nasal, and palatal mucous glands.
(c) Nerve to stapedius muscle.
Table 18.1 Features of the three ear ossicles
Malleus
Incus
Stapes
Resemblance
Hammer
Anvil or premolar tooth
Stirrup
Development
First pharyngeal arch cartilage
First pharyngeal arch cartilage
Second pharyngeal arch cartilage
Muscle attached
Tensor tympani
None
Stapedius
Joint/Joints
Incudomalleolar (saddle type of 
synovial joint)
Incudomalleolar and incudo-
stapedial
Incudostapedial (ball and socket type of 
synovial joint)
Table 18.2 Origin, insertion, nerve supply, and actions of the intratympanic muscles
Muscle
Origin
Insertion
Nerve supply
Actions
Tensor tympani
Cartilaginous part of the 
auditory tube and sulcus tubae
Medial aspect of the upper 
end of handle of malleus
Mandibular nerve (V3)
Tenses the tympanic 
membrane
Stapedius
Interior of hollow pyramidal 
eminence on the posterior wall 
of tympanic cavity
Posterior aspect of the neck 
of stapes
Facial nerve (CNVII)
Draws the stapes laterally 
thus tilting its footplate in 
the oval window
--- Page 290 ---
4. Mandibular nerve: It provides motor fibres to tensor 
tympani muscle.
Tympanic Plexus
It is a plexus of nerves on the promontory in the medial wall 
of the middle ear. It is formed by:
(a) tympanic 
branch 
glossopharyngeal 
nerve
(Jacobson’s nerve).
(b) superior and inferior caroticotympanic nerves derived 
from sympathetic plexus around the internal carotid 
artery, and
(c) branch from facial ganglion (geniculate ganglion).
The tympanic plexus supplies mucous membrane of the 
middle ear, mastoid air cells, and bony eustachian tube. The 
lesser petrosal nerve derived from it contains secretomotor 
fibres of glossopharyngeal nerve to supply the parotid gland 
via otic ganglion.
Referred pain of ear: Since the middle ear and external ear 
are supplied by the branches of trigeminal (CNV), 
glossopharyngeal (CNIX) and vagus (CNX) nerves, the pain 
in the ear (otalgia) is often referred to other areas supplied 
by these nerves, e.g., tongue, teeth, tonsil, and pharynx.
Clinical correlation
Mastoid Antrum
It is a large air-containing space in the upper part of the 
mastoid process. It communicates anteriorly with tympanic 
cavity through aditus ad antrum. Its roof is formed by 
tegmen antri, which is the backward continuation of tegmen 
tympani. It separates the antrum from middle cranial fossa. 
The lateral wall of the antrum is formed by a plate of bone, 
which is on an average 1.5 cm thick in the adult. (It is only 
2 mm thick in a newborn.) It is marked on the surface of 
mastoid by suprameatal triangle (McEwen’s triangle).
The floor of antrum receives the openings of mastoid air 
cells. Its posterior wall is related to sigmoid sinus whereas its 
medial wall presents bulging of the lateral semicircular canal.
Development
Mastoid antrum develops as a backward extension of 
tympanic cavity and assumes the full adult size at birth.
The mastoid abscess is a common condition. The antrum 
is approached surgically through its lateral wall. Thus it is 
important to assess the limits of suprameatal triangle. This 
triangle is bounded above by supramastoid crest, 
anteroinferiorly by posterosuperior segment of bony external 
auditory meatus and posteriorly by a line drawn as a tangent 
to the posterior margin of the bony meatal opening.
Clinical correlation
Pharyngotympanic Tube (Fig. 18.12)
The pharyngotympanic tube (auditory tube) is an 
osseocartilaginous tube, which connects the nasopharynx 
with tympanic cavity (middle ear). It is directed downwards, 
forwards, and medially from the tympanic cavity to the 
nasopharynx.
The auditory tube maintains equilibrium of air pressure 
on either side of the tympanic membrane for its proper 
vibration.
The pharyngotympanic tube is described in detail in 
Chapter 14.
Development of the Middle Ear
auditory tube and middle ear develop from 
endodermal tubotympanic recess, which arises from the 
first pharyngeal pouch (and partly from second pharyngeal 
pouch). The mastoid antrum develops as an extension of 
the middle ear cavity into the mastoid process.
The malleus and incus develop from mesoderm of the 
first arch. The stapes develops from mesoderm of the 
second arch except its foot palate and annular ligament, 
which are derived from otic capsule.
INTERNAL EAR
The internal ear consists of a closed system of fluid filled 
intercommunicating membranous sacs and ducts called 
membranous labyrinth. The fluid filled in the membranous 
labyrinth is called endolymph. The membranous labyrinth 
Fig. 18.12 Pharyngotympanic tube.
External acoustic
meatus
Tympanic
cavity
Tympanic
Pharyngeal
opening
Tympanic
membrane
Bony part
Cartilaginous part
Pharyngotympanic tube
--- Page 291 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
lies within the complex intercommunicating bony cavities 
and canals (bony labyrinth) in the petrous part of the 
temporal bone. The space between the membranous and 
bony labyrinth is filled with fluid called perilymph. The 
sensory receptors within the membranous labyrinth are 
responsible for hearing and balancing (equilibrium).
Components of the Internal Ear
The internal ear consists of two components, viz.
1. Membranous labyrinth.
2. Bony labyrinth.
MEMBRANOUS LABYRINTH (Fig. 18.13)
The membranous labyrinth consists of the following four 
parts (Fig. 18.12A):
1. Cochlear duct.
2. Saccule.
3. Utricle.
4. Semicircular ducts (three).
The cochlear duct lies within the bony cochlea, the saccule, 
and utricle lie within the bony vestibule, and three 
semicircular ducts lie within the three bony semicircular 
canals.
These four parts are interconnected as follows:
1. The cochlear duct (basal turn) is connected to saccule by 
ductus reuniens.
2. The saccule and utricle are connected to each other by 
Y-shaped utriculo-saccular duct, which expands to form 
ductus and saccus endolymphaticus.
3. The utricle is connected to three semicircular ducts 
through five openings.
N.B.
• The sensory receptor within cochlear duct is spiral organ 
of Corti. It is concerned with hearing.
• The sensory receptors within saccule and utricle are 
maculae. They are concerned with static balance.
• The sensory receptors within the semicircular ducts are 
cristae ampullaris. They are concerned with kinetic 
balance.
The sensations from cristae (kinetic balance) and maculae 
(static balance) are carried by vestibular nerve, while sensations 
of hearing from spiral organ are carried by the cochlear 
nerve (Fig. 18.14).
Cochlear Duct (Scala Media)
The cochlear duct is a spiral anterior part of the membranous 
labyrinth having two- and three-fourth turns. It lies in the 
middle part of the cochlear canal between scala vestibuli and 
scala tympani. The cochlear duct contains spiral organ of 
Corti, which is sensory receptor for hearing.
Structure
The structure of cochlear duct is best studied in cross section 
of the cochlear canal. In cross section, the cochlear duct is 
triangular in shape (Fig. 18.15).
Boundaries
Base: 
 Formed by the osseous spiral lamina (medially) 
and basilar membrane (laterally).
Roof: 
 Formed by the vestibular membrane (Reissner’s 
membrane), which passes from upper surface of 
spiral lamina to the wall of cochlea.
Laterally: It is bounded by the outer wall of cochlear canal.
Spiral Organ of Corti
It is the peripheral organ of hearing in the cochlear duct and 
is situated on the basilar membrane. The important 
components of the organ of Corti are as follows:
1. Tunnel of Corti: It is formed by the inner and outer rod 
cells. It contains a fluid called corticolymph. The exact 
function of rods and corticolymph is not known.
2. Hair cells: These are receptor cells of hearing located 
on basilar membrane and their apices possess stereocilia 
Cochlear duct
Saccule Utricle Semicircular ducts (3)
Saccule
Utricle
Ampullae of
semicircular ducts
Anterior
Lateral
Posterior
Semicircular ducts
Utriculo-saccular duct
Ductus endolymphaticus
Saccus endolymphaticus
Cochlear
duct
Ductus
reuniens
Aqueduct of vestibule
Fig. 18.13 Membranous labyrinth: A, four parts of labyrinth; 
B, complete labyrinth.
--- Page 292 ---
Fig. 18.14 Sensory receptors in different parts of the membranous labyrinth and nerves, whic h carry sensations from them.
Foramen singulare
Superior vestibular area
Transverse crest
Inferior vestibular area
Facial canal
Tractus spiralis foraminosus
Fundus of internal
acoustic meatus
Central foramen
Cochlear nerve
Spiral organ of Corti
Maculae
Cristae ampullaris
Vestibular nerve
Scala vestibuli
Vestibular
(Reissner’s)
membrane
Scala media
(cochlear duct)
Membrana tectoria
Stria vascularis
Spiral ligament
Basilar membrane
Tunnel of Corti bounded by
inner and outer rod cells
Outer hair cells
Scala tympani
Inner hair cells
Osseous spiral lamina
Cochlear nerve
Spiral ganglion
Fig. 18.15 Cross-section of the cochlear canal showing boundaries of the cochlear duct and organ of Corti within it.
--- Page 293 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
(hair), which are overlaid by tectorial membrane. The inner 
cells are flask shaped and arranged in a single row while 
outer cells are cylindrical and arranged in 3 or 4 rows. 
When sound vibrations (in fact fluid waves) pass from 
perilymph of scala vestibuli to the perilymph of scala 
tympani, the basilar membrane bulge and the overlying 
hair cells are stimulated. The inner hair cells are richly 
supplied by the cochlear nerve fibres and are responsible 
for transmission of auditory impulses. The outer hair 
cells are innervated by efferent fibres from the olivary 
complex and are concerned with modulation function of 
inner hair cells.
3. Supporting cells (Deiter’s and Hansen’s Cells): The 
Deiter’s cells are situated between the outer hair cells and 
provide support to the latter. The Hansen’s cells lie outside 
the hair cells.
4. Membrana tectoria: It is made up of gelatinous substance 
and overlies the hair cells. Medially it is attached to osseous 
spiral lamina. The shearing force between the hair cells 
and tectorial membrane stimulate the hair cells.
N.B. The scala vestibuli and scala tympani containing 
perilymph lie above and below basilar membrane 
respectively. Therefore cochlea duct (containing endolymph) 
is bathed above and below by the perilymph within the two 
scalae. The two scala are continuous with each other through 
a narrow opening at the apex of cochlear duct called 
helicotrema (Fig. 18.17).
Innervation of Hair Cells of Organ of Corti
Ninety-five percent of afferent fibres (peripheral processes of 
bipolar neurons of spiral ganglion) supply the inner hair cells 
while only 5% supply the outer hair cells. The spiral ganglion 
is located in the spiral canal within the modiolus near the 
base of the spiral lamina. The central processes of ganglion 
cells form the cochlear nerve.
Efferent fibres to the outer hair cells come from 
olivocochlear bundle. Their cell bodies are located in the 
superior olivary complex.
Saccule and Utricle
The saccule, a small globular membranous sac, lies in the 
anteroinferior part of the vestibule. The utricle is an oblong 
membranous sac and is larger than the saccule. It lies in the 
posterosuperior part of the vestibule.
The saccule is connected in front to the basal turn of 
cochlear duct by the ductus reuniens and behind with the 
utricle by a Y-shaped utriculo-saccular duct. The vertical 
limb of ‘Y’ continues as endolymphatic duct (ductus
endolymphaticus) and its dilated blind terminal end is called 
saccus endolymphaticus. The endolymphatic duct passes 
through a bony canal (aqueduct of vestibule) in the posterior 
part of petrous temporal bone and its dilated terminal end 
projects on the posterior surface of petrous temporal bone 
beneath the dura mater of the posterior cranial fossa. The 
endolymph is absorbed by the epithelial cells lining the 
saccus and drains into extradural vascular plexus.
The utricle receives the three semicircular ducts posteriorly 
through five openings.
Semicircular Ducts
The three semicircular ducts—anterior, posterior, and lateral 
lie within the corresponding semicircular canals. They open 
into the utricle by five openings.
Each duct has one dilated end called ampulla. It 
corresponds to the ampulla of the corresponding semicircular 
canal. The ampullary end of each duct bears a raised crest 
(crista ampullaris), which projects into its lumen.
Peripheral receptors in saccule, utricle, and semicircular 
ducts (vestibular system) are as follows:
1. Maculae: These are sensory receptors located in the medial 
walls of saccule and utricle. They sense position of head 
in response to gravity and linear acceleration, i.e., static 
balance.
2. Cristae: These are sensory receptors located in the 
ampullated ends of the three semicircular ducts. They 
respond to angular acceleration, i.e., kinetic balance.
Innervation of Peripheral Receptors of Vestibular System
The vestibular or Scarpa’s ganglion is situated in the lateral 
part of the internal acoustic meatus. It consists of bipolar 
neurons. The peripheral processes of these cells innervate 
hair cells of cristae and maculae, while their central processes 
aggregate to form the vestibular nerve.
BONY LABYRINTH
The bony labyrinth consists of a series of intercommunicating 
bony cavities and canals within the petrous part of the 
temporal bone.
Parts
The bony labyrinth presents three parts (Fig. 18.16); from 
before backwards these are as follows:
Fig. 18.16 Parts of the bony labyrinth.
Anterior
Vestibule
Fenestra vestibuli
Cochlea
Fenestra cochleae
Lateral
Posterior
Semicircular canals
Crus
commune
--- Page 294 ---
1. Cochlea.
2. Vestibule.
3. Semicircular canals (three).
Cochlea
The cochlea resembles the shell of a common snail. Its apex 
(cupula) is directed towards the medial wall of the tympanic 
cavity, while its base is directed towards the bottom of the 
internal acoustic meatus.
The cochlea consists of a central pillar called modiolus, 
and a bony cochlear canal:
1. Modiolus is the axial bony stem around which the cochlear 
canal spirals. It is like an elongated cone. The base of 
modiolus lies at the fundus of the internal acoustic 
meatus and apex points towards the middle ear. The 
apex of the modiolus is overlaid by the apical turn of the 
cochlear canal. The modiolus is perforated spirally at its 
base in the internal acoustic meatus by the fibres of the 
cochlear nerve.
2. Cochlear canal is arranged spirally around the modiolus 
and makes two and three-fourth turns. Its basal turn
bulges into tympanic cavity as the promontory.
A spiral ridge of bone called spiral lamina projects from the 
surface of the modiolus into the cochlear canal like a thread 
of a screw. The free edge of lamina splits into the upper and 
lower lips. The vestibular membrane extends from the upper 
lip of lamina to the outer wall of the cochlea, while basilar 
membrane extends from the lower lip of the lamina to the 
outer wall of the cochlea. The triangular area thus enclosed 
by the vestibular and basilar membranes, and the outer wall 
of the cochlear canal forms the cochlear duct (scala media).
The spiral lamina partly divides the cochlear canal into scala 
vestibuli above and scala tympani below. The scala vestibuli 
and scala tympani communicate with each other at the 
apex of the cochlea by a small opening called helicotrema 
(Fig. 18.17).
At the basal turn of cochlea, the scala vestibuli 
communicates with the anterior wall of the vestibule. Close 
to the basal turn of cochlea the scala tympani presents two 
features—fenestra cochleae and beginning of the aqueduct 
of cochlea:
1. The fenestra cochleae open into the tympanic cavity 
below and behind the promontory. It is closed by 
secondary tympanic membrane in life.
2. The aqueduct of cochlea is a narrow tubular canal through 
which perilymph within the cochlea communicates with 
the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) of the subarachnoid space 
through cochlear canaliculus.
Vestibule
The vestibule is a central ovoid cavity of bony labyrinth 
between cochlea in front and three semicircular canals behind. 
It lies medial to the middle ear cavity.
The lateral wall of the vestibule communicates with the 
middle ear cavity by fenestra vestibuli, which in life is closed 
by footplate of stapes and annular ligament.
The medial wall of the vestibule presents two recesses 
(Fig. 18.18): a spherical recess in front and an elliptical recess
behind. The two recesses are separated by the vestibular crest, 
which splits inferiorly to enclose the cochlear recess. The 
spherical recess lodges saccule and is perforated by foramina 
Fig. 18.17 Diagrammatic representation of the cochlear 
duct within cochlear canal. Note that cochlear duct is filled 
with endo lymph and scala vestibuli and scala tympani are 
filled with perilymph (CSF = cerebrospinal fluid).
Oval window
closed by foot
plate of stapes
Stapes
Scala vestibuli
(filled with perilymph)
Helicotrema
Scala media/
cochlear duct
(filled with
endolymph)
Scala tympani
(filled with perilymph)
Aqueduct of cochlea
Round
window
closed by
secondary
tympanic
membrane
Fig. 18.18 Schematic interior of the bony labyrinth showing 
features in the medial, posterior, and anterior walls of the 
vestibule.
Foramina for lower division of
vestibular nerve fibres from sup.
and lat. semicircular ducts
Vestibular crest
Foramina for upper division
of vestibular nerve
Spherical recess (for saccule)
Opening
leading to
scala vestibuli
Bony spiral
lamina
Anterior wall
Cochlear recess
Opening for cochlear
nerve filaments
Opening for aqueduct
of vestibule
Five openings of three
semicircular ducts
Posterior wall
Elliptical recess (for utricle)
--- Page 295 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
for the passage of lower division of the vestibular nerve. The 
elliptical recess lodges the utricle, and is perforated by 
foramina for the passage of the upper division of the 
vestibular nerve.
Just below the elliptical recess, there is an opening of a 
bony canal called aqueduct of vestibule, which reaches the 
epidural space on the posterior surface of the petrous 
temporal bone. The aqueduct of vestibule transmits the 
tubular prolongation of membranous labyrinth, the saccus 
and ductus endolymphaticus. The anterior wall of the 
vestibule bears an opening, which communicates with scala 
vestibuli of the cochlear canal. The posterior wall of the 
vestibule bears five openings of three semicircular canals.
Semicircular canals
There are three bony semicircular canals: anterior (superior), 
posterior, and lateral. They lie in three planes at right angles 
to each other (Fig. 18.19). Each canal is about two-third of a 
circle and is dilated at one end to form the ampulla:
1. The anterior semicircular canal lies in a vertical plane at 
right angle to the long axis of the petrous temporal bone. 
It is convex upwards and its position is indicated on the 
anterior surface of the petrous temporal bone as arcuate 
eminence. Its anterior ampullated end communicates with 
vestibule anterolaterally. Its posterior non-ampullated end 
unites with the upper non-ampullated end of the 
posterior semicircular canal to form crus commune,
which opens into vestibule.
2. The posterior semicircular canal also lies in a vertical 
plane parallel to the long axis of petrous temporal bone. 
Its convexity is directed backwards. Its lower ampullated 
end communicates with the vestibule and is innervated 
separately by a branch of vestibular nerve, which passes 
through foramen singulare in the fundus of internal 
acoustic meatus.
Fig. 18.19 Direction of semicircular canals.
3. The lateral semicircular canal lies in the horizontal 
plane. Its convexity is directed posterolaterally. Its 
anterolateral end is ampullated and lies close to the 
ampullated end of the anterior semicircular canal. 
Both the ends of this canal open directly into the 
vestibule.
Thus three semicircular canals open in the vestibule by five 
openings.
N.B.
• The lateral semicircular canals of two sides lie in the same 
plane.
• The anterior semicircular canal of one side lies parallel to 
the posterior semicircular canal of the other side.
• The anterior and posterior semicircular canals, lying 
across and along the long axis of the petrous temporal 
bone, are each at 45º with the sagittal plane.
Anterior (superior) semicircular canals
Lateral
semicircular
canal
Lateral
semicircular
canal
Posterior semicircular canals
Right
Left
--- Page 296 ---
A 10-year-old boy was taken by his mother to an ENT 
surgeon and complained that her son was suffering 
from ear ache. On otoscopic examination, the surgeon 
found that right external acoustic meatus of the boy was 
full of wax. He told the mother that her son had wax in 
his right ear and it had to be removed by a minor proce-
dure called syringing, for which she agreed. While 
syringing, the child started coughing, gagging, and sub-
sequently vomited. The pulse rate of the child decreased.
Questions
1. Which glands in the external auditory meatus 
secrete wax?
2. Which nerves provide sensory innervation to the 
external auditory meatus?
3. Mention the anatomical basis of coughing, gagging, 
vomiting, and decreased pulse rate during syringing 
of the ear.
Answers
1. Ceruminous glands (modified sweat glands).
2. Auriculotemporal nerve, auricular branch of vagus.
3. Irritation of auricular branch of vagus during 
syringing may reflexly produce coughing (called 
ear cough), vomiting and decrease in pulse rate.
Clinical Case Study
Golden Facts to Remember
  Largest piece of yellow elastic cartilage in the body
Cartilage of the pinna of the external ear
  Narrowest part of external auditory meatus
Isthmus (44 mm lateral to tympanic membrane)
  All the parts of the ear acquire an almost adult 
size at birth except
External ear
  Safest quadrant of tympanic membrane for 
surgical incision (myringotomy)
Posterior inferior quadrant
  Smallest skeletal muscle in the body
Stapedius
  Point of maximum convexity on the medial surface 
of tympanic membrane
Umbo
  Smallest ball and socket joint in the body
Incudostapedial
  Smallest saddle joint in the body
Incudomalleolar
  All the contents within the middle ear are outside 
its mucous lining except
  Smallest long bone in the body
Malleus
  Smallest bone in the body
Stapes
  Widest part of the pharyngotympanic tube
Pharyngeal end (1.25 cm behind the inferior nasal 
concha)
  Age at which the fetus can hear conversation 
between the mother and father
At 20th week of gestation of intrauterine life*
  Parts of the ear and related structures, which are 
of full adult size at birth
Tympanic cavity, ear ossicles, internal ear of mastoid 
antrum
*This fact probably explains how Abhimanyu, who still inside the womb of his mother, could hear conversation between 
his mother and father (Arjuna), in the legend narrated in the great Indian epic, the Mahabharata, written thousands of 
years ago.
--- Page 297 ---
Orbit and Eyeball
CHAPTER
ORBIT
The orbits are a pair of pyramidal-shaped bony cavities, 
located one on either side of the root of the nose and provides 
sockets for rotatory movements of the eyeballs. Each orbit is 
a four-sided pyramid with apex directed behind at the optic 
canal and base forward, represented by the orbital margin. 
The medial walls of two orbits are parallel to each other but 
the lateral walls are set at right angle to each other (Fig. 19.1).
The long axis of each orbit (orbital axis) passes backwards 
and medially.
BOUNDARIES
The boundaries of the orbit (Fig. 19.2) are as follows:
Medial wall (thinnest): Formed by four bones; from before 
backwards these are as follows:
1. Frontal process of maxilla.
2. Lacrimal process of maxilla.
3. Orbital plate of ethmoid.
4. Body of sphenoid.
Lateral wall (strongest): Formed by two bones, viz.
1. Orbital surface of the zygomatic bone in front.
2. Orbital surface of greater wing of sphenoid behind.
Floor: Formed by three bones:
1. Orbital surface of the body of maxilla.
2. Orbital surface of the zygomatic bone, anterolaterally.
3. Orbital process of the palatine bone, posteromedially.
Roof: Formed by two bones, viz.
1. Orbital plate of the frontal bone in front.
2. Lesser wing of the sphenoid behind.
Presenting Features in Four Boundary Walls of Orbit 
(Fig. 19.3)
Medial wall: Presents two features, viz.
Lacrimal fossa is bounded in front by the anterior 
lacrimal crest of maxilla and behind by the posterior 
lacrimal crest of the lacrimal bone. The lacrimal fossa 
communicates with the nasal cavity through nasolacrimal 
canal. The lacrimal fossa and nasolacrimal canal lodge 
lacrimal sac and nasolacrimal duct, respectively.
2. Anterior and posterior ethmoidal foramina, lie at the 
junction between medial wall and the roof of the orbit.
Lateral wall: Presents two features, viz.
1. Zygomatic foramen. Sometimes there are two small 
foramina, for zygomaticofacial and zygomatico-
temporal nerves.
2. Whitnall’s tubercle, a small bony tubercle just behind 
the lateral orbital margin and slightly below the 
frontozygomatic suture.
Floor: Presents two features, viz.
1. Infraorbital groove and canal.
2. Small rough impression in anteromedial angle for origin 
of inferior oblique muscle.
Fig. 19.1 Diagrammatic horizontal section through orbits 
showing: angle formed between lateral walls, distance 
between medial walls and their direction (parallel to each 
other), visual and orbital axes.
Medial
walls
2.5 cm
Lateral wall
Lateral wall
Visual (optical)
axis
Orbital axis
--- Page 298 ---
Orbit and Eyeball
Roof: Presents three features, viz.
1. Fossa for lacrimal gland in the anterolateral part.
2. Trochlear notch or spine at the anteromedial angle.
3. Optic canal at the extreme posterior part of the roof.
Apex: Lies at the posterior end of the orbit and is formed 
by sphenoid. More precisely it is formed by the centre of 
the bony bridge between optic canal and superior orbital 
fissure.
Base: Open and quadrangular, its boundaries form the orbital 
margins.
Orbital Margins
The orbital margins are formed as follows:
1. Supraorbital margin is formed by the frontal bone and 
presents a notch—supraorbital notch or foramen at the 
junction of its lateral two-third and medial one-third.
2. Infraorbital margin is formed by the zygomatic bone 
laterally and maxilla medially; it is continuous with 
anterior lacrimal crest medially.
3. Medial orbital margin is ill-defined. It is formed by the 
frontal bone above and lacrimal crest of the frontal 
process of maxilla below.
Fig. 19.2 Orbit: A, margins and walls; B, schematic diagram to show the bones forming the walls of the orbit.
Infraorbital foramen
Infraorbital
groove
Posterior
Anterior
Lacrimal
crests
Lacrimal bone
Orbital plate of ethmoid
Nasal bone
Body of sphenoid
Supraorbital notch
Lesser wing of 
sphenoid
Superior
orbital fissure
Anterior and posterior
ethmoidal foramina
Infraorbital canal
Maxilla
Inferior orbital
fissure
Frontal process of
zygomatic bone
Greater wing of
sphenoid
Zygomatic foramen
Whitnall’s tubercle
Frontozygomatic
suture
Body of
sphenoid
Orbital plate of
ethmoid
Lacrimal
bone
Frontal
process of
maxilla
Medial wall
Orbital process
of palatine
Orbital surface
of maxilla
Orbital surface
of zygomatic bone
Frontal
process of
zygomatic
bone
Greater
wing of
sphenoid
Lateral wall
Floor
Orbital plate of
frontal bone
Lesser wing of
sphenoid
Roof
--- Page 299 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
4. Lateral orbital margin is formed by zygomatic process 
of the frontal bone above and frontal process of the 
zygomatic bone below.
The margins of the orbit are readily palpable in vivo.
N.B. The orbital margins provide a fair bony protection to 
the eye except at the lateral margin. For this reason 
protective eye guards are designed to compensate for it, in 
squash and handball players and still permitting good 
peripheral vision.
RELATIONS
The relations of orbit are as follows:
Above: Anterior cranial fossa and frontal air sinus 
(usually).
Lateral: Temporal fossa in front and middle cranial fossa 
behind.
Below: Maxillary air sinus.
Medial: Ethmoidal air sinuses.
Fig. 19.3 Presenting features in the four boundary walls of the orbit.
Lacrimal fossa (fossa
for lacrimal gland)
Whitnall’s tubercle
Zygomatic foramen
Inferior orbital
fissure
Infraorbital groove and canal
Inferior oblique
muscle
Posterior
lacrimal crest
Lacrimal fossa
Anterior
lacrimal crest
Posterior
Trochlear notch
Anterior
Ethmoidal
foramina
Fig. 19.4 Sagittal section of the orbital cavity showing some of its contents.
Orbital fat
Sheath of
optic nerve
Superior rectus
Levator
palpebrae
superioris
Orbital septum
Upper tarsal plate
Lower tarsal plate
Inferior oblique
Orbital septum
Fascia bulbi
(Tenon’s capsule)
Inferior rectus
Optic nerve
Eyeball
--- Page 300 ---
Orbit and Eyeball
ORBITAL FASCIA OR PERIORBITA
It is the periosteum of the bony orbit, which lines the bony 
boundaries of the orbit and forms a funnel-shaped fascial 
sheath that encloses the orbital contents (Fig. 19.5). It is 
loosely attached to the bones, hence can be easily stripped off 
especially from roof and medial wall of the orbit.
At the optic canal and superior orbital fissure, it becomes 
continuous with the periosteum lining the interior of the 
skull (endocranium). At the infraorbital fissure and orbital 
margins, it becomes continuous with the periosteum 
covering the external surface of the skull (periosteum).
CONTENTS
Contents of the orbit includes the following structures 
(Fig. 19.4):
1. Eyeball (most important content).
2. Muscles.
3. Fascia bulbi.
4. Nerves
(a) Optic
(b) Oculomotor
(c) Trochlear
(d) Abducent
(e) Ophthalmic
(f) Ciliary ganglion.
5. Ophthalmic artery.
6. Ophthalmic veins.
7. Lacrimal gland.
8. Orbital fat.
All these structures lie within the orbital periosteum that 
lines the bony walls of the orbit.
N.B. Infraorbital nerve and vessels and zygomatic nerve lie 
outside the orbital periosteum, hence not included in the 
contents of the orbit.
EXTRAOCULAR MUSCLES
The extraocular muscles are classified into two groups: 
voluntary and involuntary.
VOLUNTARY MUSCLES
There are seven voluntary muscles in the orbit. Of these, six 
muscles move the eyeball and one muscle moves the upper 
eyelid.
The muscles moving the eyeball are four recti and two 
oblique muscles. The one which moves the upper eyelid is 
called levator palpebrae superioris (Fig. 19.6):
1. Four recti muscles
(a) Superior rectus,
(b) Inferior rectus,
(c) Medial rectus, and
(d) Lateral rectus.
2. Two oblique muscles
(a) Superior oblique,
(b) Inferior oblique.
3. One levator palpebrae superioris.
INVOLUNTARY MUSCLES
There are three involuntary/smooth muscles, viz. superior 
tarsal or Muller's muscle, inferior tarsal and orbitalis.
The voluntary muscles are described in detail because of 
their functional significance in the following text:
Recti muscles
Origin: All the recti arise from the corresponding margins 
of the common tendinous ring. The lateral rectus arises by 
two heads.
The common tendinous ring encloses the optic canal and 
middle part of the superior orbital fissure. It is attached 
medially to apex of the orbit and laterally to a small tubercle 
(tubercle of Zinn) on the lower border of superior orbital 
fissure.
Insertion: All the recti are inserted into sclera little posterior 
to the limbus (corneoscleral junction) in front of the equator 
of the eyeball. Average distance from limbus is:
Medial rectus, 5 mm
Inferior rectus, 6 mm
Lateral rectus, 7 mm
Superior rectus, 8 mm
The origin and insertion of recti muscles are shown in 
Figure 19.6.
Fig. 19.5 Periorbita.
Periorbita
(Orbital
periosteum)
--- Page 302 ---
Orbit and Eyeball
ACTIONS OF MUSCLES ON THE EYEBALL
The two eyes face forwards and their long axes (visual optic 
axes) lie in sagittal plane, parallel with each other and with 
medial walls of the orbits (Fig. 19.1). The lateral walls of orbits 
slope backwards and medially making a right (90°) angle 
with each other. The ocular muscles and optic nerve come 
from the apex of the orbit near the back of the medial wall 
and pass forwards and laterally to be attached to the eyeball. 
The actions of superior and inferior recti are, therefore, not 
straight, despite their name. The superior and inferior 
oblique muscles, therefore, have to act in concert with two 
recti in order to produce direct upward and downward 
movements of the eyeball.
Axis of Movements of the Eyeball
 Elevation and depression: around the transverse axis 
passing through the equator.
 Adduction and abduction: around the vertical axis passing 
through the equator.
 Rotation (torsion): around the anteroposterior axis extending 
from anterior pole to posterior pole of the eyeball.
When 12 o’clock position of the cornea rotates medially, it is 
called intorsion and when it rotates laterally, it called 
extorsion.
Actions of Individual Muscles 
The actions of individual muscles are easily deduced from 
Starling’s diagram (Fig. 19.8).
They are as follows:
Superior rectus (SR): elevation, adduction, and intorsion.
Medial rectus (MR): adduction.
Inferior rectus (IR): depression, adduction, and extorsion.
Lateral rectus (LR): abduction.
Superior oblique (SO): depression, abduction, and intorsion.
Inferior oblique (IO): elevation, abduction, and extorsion.
Associated Movements of the Eyeball
1. Conjugate movements: when both the eyes move in the 
same direction with visual axes being parallel.
2. Disconjugate movements: when the axes of both eyes 
converge or diverge.
Strabismus/squint: Unilateral paralysis of an individual 
muscle due to involvement of the nerves produces strabismus 
or squint (deviation of eye to the opposite side) and may result 
in diplopia (double vision). In diplopia, the light from an 
object is not focused on the identical areas of both retinae. 
The real image falls on the macula of the unaffected eye and 
false image falls on the peripheral part of retina of the 
paralyzed eye. The examples are as under:
Muscle paralyzed
Nerve involved
Effects 
Lateral rectus
Abducent
Medial squint
Medial rectus
Oculomotor
Lateral squint
Clinical correlation
Levator palpebrae superioris (LPS) muscle
Origin: from undersurface of the lesser wing of sphenoid at 
the apex of the orbit, above the common tendinous ring by a 
narrow tendon.
Insertion (Fig. 3.22): the muscle broadens as it passes 
forwards from its origin and divides into three lamellae:
1. Upper lamella consisting of skeletal muscle penetrates 
the orbital septum passes through the fibres of 
orbicularis oculi to be inserted into the skin of upper 
eyelid.
Fig. 19.7 Nerve supply of the extraocular muscles (NC = 
nasociliary nerve).
Abducent
nerve
Upper division of
oculomotor nerve
Superior rectus
Trochlear nerve
Superior
oblique
Medial rectus
Lower
division of
oculomotor
nerve
Inferior rectus
Inferior oblique
Ciliary ganglion
Lateral
rectus
Levator palpebrae
superioris
Fig. 19.8 Schematic diagram (modified after Starling) showing 
actions of various extraocular muscles (IO = inferior oblique, 
IR = inferior rectus, LR = lateral rectus, MR = medial rectus, 
SR = superior rectus, SO = superior oblique).
SO IR
IO SR
--- Page 303 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
2. Intermediate lamella consisting of smooth muscle 
(superior tarsal muscle) is inserted on to the upper 
border of the superior tarsal plate.
3. Lower lamella consisting of connective tissue is inserted 
on to the superior fornix of the conjunctiva.
Nerve supply
1. Striped (skeletal muscle) part is supplied by the upper 
division of oculomotor nerve.
2. Unstriped (smooth muscle) part is supplied by the post-
ganglionic sympathetic fibres from the superior cervical 
ganglion.
Actions: Elevation of the upper eyelid to open the eye.
Paralysis of levator palpebrae superioris: Paralysis of 
levator palpebrae superioris due to involvement of the 
oculomotor nerve leads to complete ptosis (drooping of 
upper eyelid). The lesion of cervical sympathetic chain (as 
in Horner’s syndrome) leads to partial ptosis (partial 
drooping of upper eyelid) as it affects only smooth muscle 
part of LPS.
Clinical correlation
FASCIA BULBI OR FASCIAL
SHEATH OF THE EYEBALL
The fascia bulbi (Tenon’s capsule) is a loose membranous 
sheath that envelops the eyeball and extends from optic 
nerve to the sclerocorneal junction. It is separated from the 
sclera by the episcleral space. The Tenon’s capsule forms a 
socket for the eyeball to facilitate free ocular movements. It 
separates the eyeball from orbital fat (Fig. 19.9).
The fascia bulbi is pierced by:
(a) tendons of four recti and two oblique muscles of the 
eyeball, and
(b) ciliary nerves and vessels around the entrance of the 
optic nerve.
SUSPENSORY AND CHECK 
LIGAMENTS OF THE EYE
The fascia bulbi provides a tubular sleeve around each 
muscle that pierces it. From the fascial sleeve of lateral rectus, 
a triangular expansion (lateral check ligament) extends 
laterally for attachment to the lateral wall of the orbit on 
Whitnall’s tubercle. Similarly, a triangular expansion from 
sleeve of medial rectus (medial check ligament) extends 
medially for attachment to the medial wall of the orbit on 
posterior lacrimal crest of the lacrimal bone.
The fascial sleeve of inferior rectus thickens on its 
underside and blends with the sleeve of inferior oblique as 
well as with the medial and lateral check ligaments forming 
a hammock-like support for the eyeball. It is called as 
suspensory ligament of the eye (or suspensory ligament 
of Lockwood). It is expanded in the centre and narrows at 
its extremities. At the posterior pole of the eyeball the 
fascia bulbi becomes continuous with sheath of the optic 
nerve (Fig. 19.10).
• If suspensory ligament of the eye remains intact when the 
floor of the orbit is fractured or the maxilla is removed 
surgically, the eyeball does not sag.
• During enucleation of the eye, if Tenon’s fascia is not 
damaged, and artificial eye is planted subsequently within 
the socket of Tenon’s capsule it is able to move.
Clinical correlation
Medial check
ligament
Fascia bulbi
(Tenon’s capsule)
Sheath around
medial rectus
Sheath around
lateral rectus
Episcleral
space
Lateral check
ligament
Sheath around
inferior rectus
and inferior
oblique
Sheath of optic nerve
Fig. 19.9 Fascia bulbi (Tenon’s capsule).
Fig. 19.10 Suspensory and check ligaments of the eye 
(IO = inferior oblique, IR = inferior rectus, LR = lateral rectus, 
MR = medial rectus).
Lateral check
ligament
Whitnall’s
tubercle
Suspensory
ligament of
Lockwood
Posterior
lacrimal
crest
Medial check
ligament
--- Page 304 ---
Orbit and Eyeball
NERVES OF THE ORBIT
Optic Nerve
It has been described in detail in Chapter 22. Therefore only 
brief account is presented here.
This nerve of sight is 4 cm long. It is made up of about 
1 million myelinated nerve fibres. The optic nerve emerges 
from the eyeball, 3 or 4 mm nasal to the posterior pole of the 
eyeball. It runs backwards and medially, passes through the 
optic canal to enter the cranial cavity where it joins the optic 
chiasma. The entire nerve is enclosed in three meningeal 
sheaths derived from the meninges of the brain. The 
subarachnoid space around the brain, therefore, extends 
around the nerve up to the eyeball.
Relations
The central artery and vein of the retina pierce the optic 
nerve inferomedially about 1.25 cm behind the eyeball. The 
optic nerve is crossed superiorly from before backward by:
(a) superior ophthalmic vein,
(b) ophthalmic artery, and
(c) nasociliary nerve.
Mnemonic: VAN
Oculomotor Nerve (Fig. 19.11)
The two divisions of oculomotor nerve enter the orbit through 
superior orbital fissure within the common tendinous ring. 
Here the nasociliary nerve lies between the two divisions.
The smaller superior division runs forwards above the 
optic nerve and supplies the superior rectus, then pierces it to 
supply the levator palpebrae superioris.
The larger inferior division passes below the optic nerve 
and divides into three branches to supply medial rectus, inferior 
rectus, and inferior oblique.
The nerve to inferior oblique gives off the parasympathetic 
motor root to the ciliary ganglion.
Trochlear Nerve (Fig. 19.12)
The trochlear nerve enters the orbit through the superior 
orbital fissure superolateral to the common tendinous ring 
and curves medially above the levator palpebrae superioris 
to reach deep to the posterior part of superior oblique, which 
it supplies.
Abducent Nerve (Fig. 19.13)
The abducent nerve enters the orbit through superior orbital 
fissure within the common tendinous ring lateral to two 
divisions of the oculomotor nerve and nasociliary nerve, 
turns laterally away from optic nerve to enter the posterior 
part of lateral rectus.
Ophthalmic Nerve (Fig. 19.14)
The ophthalmic nerve is the first and the smallest of the 
three divisions of trigeminal nerve. It is purely sensory.
Course and relations
It arises from medial part of the convex anterior border of 
the trigeminal ganglion. It pierces the dura mater of the 
trigeminal cave and enters into the lateral wall of the 
cavernous sinus where it lies below the trochlear nerve. It 
enters the orbit through superior orbital fissure by dividing 
into three branches: lacrimal, frontal, and nasociliary.
Fig. 19.11 Course and distribution of two divisions of the oculomotor nerves in the orbit: A, superior division; B, inferior 
division.
Medial rectus
Optic nerve
Superior
orbital fissure
Inferior
oblique
Inferior
rectus
Inferior division of
oculomotor nerve
Levator
palpebrae
superioris
Eyeball
Medial rectus
Superior rectus
Optic nerve
Lateral rectus
Lacrimal gland
Superior orbital fissure
Superior division of
oculomotor nerve
--- Page 305 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
Branches and distribution
1. Lacrimal nerve (smallest branch) runs along the lateral 
wall of the orbit along with lacrimal artery and ends in 
the lacrimal gland (hence its name). It is joined by a 
communicating twig from the zygomaticotemporal 
branch of the maxillary nerve carrying postganglionic 
secretomotor fibres to the lacrimal gland. The lacrimal 
nerve supplies lacrimal gland and conjunctiva. Then it 
pierces orbital septum to supply the lateral part of the 
skin of upper eyelid.
2. Frontal nerve (largest branch) runs forwards between 
levator palpebrae superioris and periosteum lining the 
roof of the orbit. In the middle of orbit, it divides into 
large supraorbital and small supratrochlear nerves:
(a) Supraorbital nerve continues in the line of the frontal 
nerve to pass through supraorbital notch, where it 
turns upwards into the forehead and divides into 
medial and lateral branches, which supply the scalp 
as far back as the vertex.
(b) Supratrochlear nerve runs forwards medial to the 
supraorbital nerve. It passes above the trochlea for 
tendon of superior oblique muscle and then turns 
upwards along the superior orbital margin and 
supplies the skin of the lower part of the forehead.
3. Nasociliary nerve runs forwards and medially, crossing 
the optic nerve from above and from lateral to medial 
side behind the ophthalmic artery. On reaching the 
medial wall of the orbit, it ends by dividing into anterior 
ethmoidal and infratrochlear nerves.
Fig. 19.12 Course and distribution of the trochlear nerve in 
the orbit. Also note the course of frontal and lacrimal nerves.
Superior oblique
Medial rectus
Levator palpebrae
superioris
Trochlear nerve
Lateral
rectus
Lacrimal nerve
Frontal nerve
Trochlear nerve
Anterior
ethmoidal
nerve
Long ciliary
nerves
Infratrochlear
nerve
Eyeball
Posterior
ethmoidal
nerve
Medial rectus
Optic nerve
Short ciliary
nerves
Superior orbital fissure
Lateral rectus
Abducent nerve
Nasociliary nerve
Fig. 19.13 Course and distribution of the abducent nerve in 
the orbit. Also note the course and branches of the 
nasociliary nerve.
External
nasal nerve
Infratrochlear nerve
Supratrochlear nerve
Supraorbital nerve
Eyeball
Lacrimal gland
Lateral
palpebral
branch
Short ciliary nerves
Communicating
twig from
zygomaticotemporal
nerve
Ciliary ganglion
Sensory root to
ciliary ganglion
Lacrimal nerve
Frontal nerve
Nasociliary nerve
Branches of
ophthalmic
division of
trigeminal
nerve
Long ciliary
nerves
Posterior
ethmoidal
nerve
Anterior
ethmoidal
nerve
Fig. 19.14 Branches and distribution of the ophthalmic nerve.
It gives the following branches:
(a) Sensory root to the ciliary ganglion is given just before 
crossing the optic nerve.
(b) Long ciliary nerves, 2 or 3, arise from nasociliary nerve 
as it crosses the optic nerve. They pass forward, enter the
--- Page 306 ---
Orbit and Eyeball
eyeball, and supply sensory fibres to the ciliary body, iris, 
and cornea.
The long ciliary nerves also carry some postganglionic 
sympathetic fibres to the dilator pupillae.
(c) Posterior ethmoidal nerve enters the posterior ethmoidal 
foramen and supplies the ethmoidal and sphenoidal air 
sinuses.
(d) Anterior ethmoidal nerve enters the anterior 
ethmoidal foramen and then passes through anterior 
ethmoidal canal to reach the anterior cranial fossa. 
Now it runs forwards over the cribriform plate of 
ethmoid and enters the nasal cavity by passing 
through a nasal slit at the side of crista galli. In the 
nasal cavity, the nerve lies in the groove on the 
posterior surface of the nasal bone and gives internal 
nasal branches to the nasal septum and lateral wall of 
the nose. At the lower border of the nasal bone, the 
nerve leaves the nasal cavity and appears on the 
dorsum of nose as external nasal nerve.
(e) Infratrochlear nerve runs forwards on the medial wall of 
the orbit just below the trochlea and ends by supplying 
the skin of upper eyelid.
Ciliary Ganglion (Fig. 19.15)
It is a peripheral parasympathetic ganglion, connected with 
the nasociliary nerve. Although topographically it is 
connected to the nasociliary nerve from ophthalmic 
division of the trigeminal, but functionally it is connected to 
the oculomotor nerve.
Location
It is a minute body (2 mm in diameter) lying near the apex of 
orbit between the optic nerve and lateral rectus muscle.
Roots
Three roots enter its posterior end. These are as follows:
1. Motor (parasympathetic) root: It is derived from nerve 
to inferior oblique and consists of preganglionic 
parasympathetic fibres from Edinger–Westphal nucleus. 
These fibres relay in the ganglion. The postganglionic 
parasympathetic fibres arise from the cells of the ganglion 
and pass through short ciliary nerves to supply the ciliary 
muscle and sphincter pupillae.
2. Sensory root: It is derived from nasociliary nerve. It 
consists of sensory fibres (for pain, touch, and 
temperature) from eyeball, which pass through the 
ciliary ganglion without relay.
3. Sympathetic root: It is derived from sympathetic plexus 
around 
internal 
carotid 
artery. 
consists 
post-ganglionic sympathetic fibres from superior 
cervical sympathetic ganglion. The fibres pass through 
the ganglion without relay and further pass through 
short ciliary nerves to supply the dilator pupillae and 
blood vessels of the eyeball.
Branches
The branches of ciliary ganglion are short ciliary nerves 
(8–10). They contain fibres from all the three roots, run above 
and below the optic nerve towards the eyeball. On reaching 
the eyeball they pierce the sclera around the attachment of 
Fig. 19.15 Roots and distribution of the ciliary ganglion.
Edinger–Westphal
nucleus
Nerve to inferior
oblique
Ciliary
ganglion
Short ciliary nerve
Sympathetic plexus around
internal carotid artery
Nasociliary nerve
Superior cervical
sympathetic ganglion
Dilator pupillae
Constrictor pupillae
--- Page 307 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
the optic nerve and pass forwards in the space between the 
sclera and choroid to reach the target organs.
The ciliary ganglion is blocked to produce dilatation of pupil 
before cataract extraction.
Clinical correlation
Infraorbital and Zygomatic Nerves (Fig. 19.16)
They lie outside the periosteum of the orbit. They are 
described in detail in Chapter 10.
OPHTHALMIC ARTERY
It is branch of the internal carotid artery. It arises from 
internal carotid artery as it emerges from the roof of the 
cavernous sinus medial to anterior clinoid process close to 
the optic canal. The artery enters the orbit through optic 
canal inferolateral to the optic nerve, both lying in a 
common dural sheath (Fig. 19.17).
The artery pierces the dura mater, ascends over the lateral 
side of the optic nerve to cross it superiorly from lateral to 
medial side along with the nasociliary nerve. It then runs 
forwards along the medial wall of the orbit tortuously to 
allow the movements of the eyeball. Near the medial angle of 
the eye it terminates by dividing into two branches: supra-
trochlear and dorsal nasal.
Branches
The branches of the ophthalmic artery are as follows:
1. Central artery of the retina (first and most important) 
arises from ophthalmic artery (still in dural sheath) 
below the optic nerve, runs forwards in the dural sheath 
and pierces the optic nerve inferomedially about 1.25 cm 
behind the eyeball. The central artery reaches the optic 
disc through the central part of the nerve. It supplies the 
optic nerve and inner 6/7 layers of the retina.
The central artery of retina is an example of a typical end 
artery. Its damage produces sudden total blindness on the 
side of the lesion.
Clinical correlation
2. Lacrimal artery arises from ophthalmic artery just before 
it crosses the optic nerve. It passes forwards along the 
upper border of lateral rectus and supplies the lacrimal 
gland, eyelids, and conjunctiva. The lacrimal artery gives 
off the following branches:
(a) Glandular branches to lacrimal gland.
(b) Two lateral palpebral arteries—one to each eyelid.
(c) Two zygomatic branches: zygomaticofacial and 
zygomaticotemporal.
(d) Recurrent meningeal branch runs backwards to enter 
the middle cranial fossa through the superior orbital 
fissure.
(e) Muscular branches.
3. Posterior ciliary arteries consist of two sets: long and 
short, both of which pierce the sclera of the eyeball 
around the optic nerve and chiefly supply the choroid 
and sclera. Long ciliary arteries are usually two and short 
Fig. 19.16 Infraorbital and zygomatic nerves.
Infraorbital nerve
Infraorbital canal
Infraorbital groove
Inferior orbital fissure
Zygomatic nerve
Zygomatic foramen
Dorsal
nasal artery
Supratrochlear artery
Supraorbital
artery
Lacrimal
gland
Zygomatic
branch
Lacrimal
artery
Recurrent
meningeal
branch
Ophthalmic
artery
Posterior
ciliary arteries
Central artery of
retina
Internal
carotid artery
Posterior
ethmoidal
artery
Anterior
ethmoidal
artery
Fig. 19.17 Ophthalmic artery.
--- Page 308 ---
Orbit and Eyeball
ciliary arteries are usually seven in number. (Remember 
that anterior ciliary arteries arise from muscular arteries.)
4. Supraorbital artery accompanies the supraorbital nerve. 
It passes through supraorbital notch to enter the scalp 
and divides into medial and lateral branches.
5. Posterior ethmoidal artery enters the posterior ethmoidal 
foramen in the medial wall of the orbit and supplies the 
ethmoidal air sinuses, nasal cavity, and dura mater.
6. Anterior ethmoidal artery enters the anterior ethmoid 
foramen in the medial wall of the orbit and supplies the 
ethmoidal air sinuses, medial and lateral wall of nasal 
cavity, and dura mater.
7. Dorsal (external) nasal artery supplies the lower part of 
the dorsum of nose.
8. Supratrochlear artery accompanies the supratrochlear 
nerve to supply the forehead.
9. Medial palpebral branches, one to each eyelid, 
anastomose with the corresponding lateral palpebral 
branches of the lacrimal artery.
N.B. Branches of ophthalmic artery accompany all the 
branches of nasociliary frontal and lacrimal nerves (derived 
from ophthalmic nerve), and within the orbit supply all the 
extraocular muscles, lacrimal gland, and the eyeball.
OPHTHALMIC VEINS
The ophthalmic veins drain the orbit and receive tributaries, 
which correspond to the branches of the ophthalmic artery 
(Fig. 19.18). The ophthalmic veins are as follows:
1. Superior ophthalmic vein: It is a large vein and 
accompanies the ophthalmic artery. It commences above 
the medial palpebral ligament and runs backwards above 
the optic nerve along with the ophthalmic artery, passes 
through the superior orbital fissure to drain into 
cavernous sinus.
It communicates anteriorly at its commencement 
with the supraorbital and angular veins.
2. Inferior ophthalmic vein: It runs below the optic nerve 
and ends either by joining the superior ophthalmic vein 
or drain directly into the cavernous sinus.
It communicates with pterygoid venous plexus by 
small veins passing through the inferior orbital fissure.
N.B. There are no lymphatics in the eyeball.
Because the ophthalmic veins drain into cavernous sinus 
and communicate with the extracranial veins, they act as 
routes through which infection can spread from outside to 
inside the cranial cavity.
Clinical correlation
LACRIMAL GLAND
It is a tubulo-acinar type of exocrine gland, which secretes 
watery lacrimal fluid. It consists of two parts: orbital and 
palpebral. The orbital part is located in the lacrimal fossa on 
the anterolateral part of the roof of the orbit, while palpebral 
part is located in lateral part of the upper eyelid. Lacrimal 
gland has already been described in detail in Chapter 3.
ORBITAL FAT
It fills up the space between the eyeball, optic nerve, and cone 
of four rectus muscles. It serves as a cushion to stabilize the 
eyeball during its movements.
EYEBALL (BULBUS OCULI)
The eyeball (L. oculus; Gk. ophthalmos) or globe of the eye is 
an organ of sight and closely resembles a camera in its 
structure. It has light-sensitive retina and is provided with a 
lens system (cornea, lens, and refractive media) for focusing 
images and device for controlling the amount of light 
admitted (the iris diaphragm). Further, like a camera, its 
inside is black to prevent reflection of light (Fig. 19.19).
The eyeball is a highly durable structure for its wall 
enclosing the refractory media, is made up of three coats, 
and the fluid filled within it distributes hydraulic pressure 
uniformly to maintain its shape.
Location
The eyeball occupies the anterior one-third of the orbital 
cavity and is embedded in the fat. It is enclosed in the thin 
fibrous sheath (Tenon’s fascia), which separates the eyeball 
from the fat. The optic nerve emerges from it, a little medial 
to its posterior pole.
Fig. 19.18 Ophthalmic veins.
Cavernous
sinus
Inferior
orbital fissure
Pterygoid
venous plexus
Deep facial vein
Angular vein
Superior
ophthalmic
vein
Eyeball
Inferior
ophthalmic
vein
Maxillary air sinus
Facial vein
--- Page 309 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
Shape and Size
It is almost spherical in shape and has a diameter of about 
24 mm.
TUNICS OF THE EYEBALL
The eyeball consists of three concentric coats (Fig. 19.19), viz.
1. An outer fibrous coat consisting of sclera and cornea.
2. A middle vascular coat consisting of choroid, ciliary 
body, and iris.
3. An inner nervous coat consisting of the retina.
OUTER FIBROUS COAT OF THE EYEBALL
Sclera
The sclera is the posterior five-sixth of the outer coat. It 
consists of dense fibrous tissue. It is opaque and a small 
portion of it is seen as the white of the eye in the palpebral 
fissure. The sclera is continuous anteriorly with the cornea. 
The junction between the sclera and cornea is termed 
corneoscleral junction. Just behind the corneoscleral 
junction, within the sclera is a circularly running canal called 
sinus venosus sclerae (canal of Schlemm). Posterior to the 
canal is a triangular projection—the scleral spur—which 
points forwards and inwards and provides attachment to the 
ciliary muscle (Fig. 19.20). It is thinnest at the equator and 
thickest at the back but weakest at the site of emergence of 
optic nerve.
Functions
1. Helps to maintain the shape of the eyeball.
2. Protects internal structures.
3. Provides attachment to muscles that move the eyeball.
Structure Piercing the Sclera
1. Optic nerve pierces the sclera, a little inferomedial to the 
posterior pole of the eyeball. The perforating fibres of 
nerve make the area sieve-like (hence called lamina
cribrosa).
2. Posterior ciliary vessels and nerves around the optic nerve.
3. Anterior ciliary arteries pierce the sclera close to 
corneoscleral junction.
4. Four choroidal veins (also called venae vorticosae) pierce 
the sclera, just behind the equator.
Cornea
The cornea is the anterior one-sixth of the outer coat. It bulges 
forwards from the sclera at the corneoscleral junction called 
Fig. 19.19 Horizontal section of the eyeball showing its 
internal structure including three coats and visual axis.
Cornea
Ciliary body
Iris
Corneoscleral
junction
Visual axis
Sclera
Optic disc
Hyaloid
 canal
Choroid
Retina
Fovea
centralis
Lens
Fig. 19.20 Meridional section of the eyeball showing ciliary region and the iridocorneal angle.
Cornea
Iridocorneal angle
Anterior chamber
Posterior
chamber
Corneoscleral junction
Canal of Schlemm
Scleral spur
Sclera
Meridional fibres
Oblique fibres
of ciliary
muscle
Ora serrata
Ciliary process
Suspensory
ligament of lens
Iris
Lens
--- Page 310 ---
Orbit and Eyeball
limbus. It is transparent and more convex than sclera because 
it represents the segment of a smaller sphere. Its thickness is 
about 1 mm at the periphery and 0.5 mm at the centre.
Features
1. It is avascular and nourished by permeation of nutrients 
from loops of capillaries at the limbus, aqueous humour, 
and lacrimal fluid.
2. It not only permits the light to enter the eye but also 
reflects the entering light.
3. It is highly sensitive and supplied by the ophthalmic 
division of trigeminal nerve.
4. The nerves of cornea form the afferent limb of the corneal 
reflex (closure of the eyelids on stimulation of the cornea).
Structure
It consists of five layers, from outside inwards these are as 
follows (Fig. 19.21):
1. Corneal epithelium: It consists of non-keratinized 
stratified squamous epithelium.
2. Anterior limiting membrane (or Bowman’s membrane):
It is made up structureless homogeneous mass without 
any elastic fibres.
3. Substantia propria (corneal stroma): It is made up of 
about 200–250 lamellae of fine collagen fibres, which 
cross each other at right angles to form corneal spaces.
Flattened fibroblasts are located between the lamellae.
The transparency of cornea is due to precise lattice 
arrangement of its lamellae embedded in the ground 
substance.
4. Posterior limiting membrane/Descemet’s membrane: It is 
made up of structureless homogeneous mass containing 
elastic fibres.
5. Endothelium: It consists of a single layer of low cuboidal 
cells.
• The periphery of the cornea frequently displays a whitish 
ring in older persons, owing to fatty degeneration. This 
whitish ring is termed arcus senilis.
Clinical correlation
• Plastic lens: The central part of the cornea receives 
oxygen from the outside air. Therefore, the soft plastic 
contact lenses worn for long periods must be permeable 
to the air so that oxygen can reach the cornea.
• Corneal opacity: The injury to cornea may cause opacity 
that may interfere with vision. The most common injuries 
of the eye are the cuts or tears of the cornea caused by 
foreign bodies.
• Corneal graft: The normal lack of vascularity and of 
lymph vessels accounts for the great success of corneal 
grafts. The cornea is successfully grafted from one person 
to the other.
• The corneal reflex is elicited clinically by gentle touching 
of the cornea with wisp of cotton wool. As the cornea is 
touched both the eyes are closed.
 Pathway: Ophthalmic nerve (afferent limb) → Main sensory 
nucleus of trigeminal nerve → Reticular formation → Both 
the facial nerves (efferent limbs).
MIDDLE VASCULAR COAT OF THE EYEBALL
The middle coat is often called vascular coat because it contains 
most of the blood vessels of the eyeball. It is frequently 
known as uveal tract by the clinicians. This coat also contains 
a large number of melanin-containing cells. It consists of three 
parts; from behind forwards these are: choroid, ciliary body, 
and iris. These three parts together form uvea or uveal tract.
Choroid
The choroid is the posterior part of the vascular coat of the 
eyeball. It is brown, thin, and highly vascular membrane 
lining the inner surface of the sclera. Anteriorly, it is 
connected to the iris by the ciliary body and posteriorly, it is 
pierced by the optic nerve.
Arteries: They are derived from short ciliary arteries, which 
pierce the sclera around the optic nerve.
Veins: They are arranged in the form of whorls, which 
converge to form the 4 or 5 venae vorticosae, which pierce the 
sclera just behind the equator to open into the ophthalmic 
veins.
N.B. The inner surface of the choroid is firmly attached to 
the retina and nourishes the rods and cones of the retina by 
diffusion.
Structure
It consists of four layers (from outside inwards), viz.
1. Suprachoroid lamina (lamina fusca): It consists of loose 
network of elastic and collagen fibres and is traversed by 
long posterior ciliary vessels and nerves.
2. Vascular lamina: It consists of loose areolar tissue and 
pigment cells. It contains branches of short posterior 
ciliary arteries and veins, which converge in whorls to 
form 4 or 5 venae vorticosae, which pierce the sclera and 
drain into ophthalmic veins.
Stratified squamous epithelium
Anterior limiting membrane
Substantia propria
Inner limiting membrane
Endothelium
Fig. 19.21 Layers of the cornea.
--- Page 311 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
3. Capillary lamina (capillary layer of choroid): It consists of 
fine network of capillaries, which nourish photoreceptors 
of the retina (rods and cones) by diffusion.
4. Basal lamina (membrane of Bruch): It is a thin 
transparent membrane, which is firmly attached to the 
pigment cell layer of the retina.
The last three layers form the choroid proper, which is 
separated from sclera by suprachoroid lamina.
N.B. In some animals such as cat, tiger, lion, etc. the 
specialized cells of choroid form a reflecting media called 
tapetum, which produces greenish glare in the eyes of these 
animals in the night.
Ciliary Body
The ciliary body is the thickening in the vascular tunic. It is 
continuous with the choroid behind and the iris in front. It 
is situated posterior to the corneoscleral junction in front of 
the ora serrata of the retina.
The ciliary bodies suspend the lens via suspensory ligaments.
Parts of the Ciliary Body
The ciliary body is triangular in cross section, thick in front 
and thin behind. The ciliary body consists of (a) ciliary ring, 
(b) ciliary processes, and (c) ciliary muscle.
Ciliary ring is an outer fibrous ring, which is continuous 
with the choroid, viz.
Ciliary processes are a group of 60–90 folds on the inner 
aspect of the ciliary body. They are arranged radially between 
the ciliary ring and the iris. The grooves between the processes 
provide attachment to the fibres of suspensory ligament of 
the lens.
The ciliary processes are a complex of capillaries and 
cuboidal epithelium, which secretes aqueous humour. The 
ciliary processes may be compared with choroidal plexus of 
the brain ventricles involved in the secretion of CSF.
The ciliary muscle is a small unstriped (smooth) muscle 
mass consisting of mainly two types of fibres, viz.
1. Outer radial fibres.
2. Inner circular fibres.
Functions
Its main function is to focus the lens for near vision. The 
ciliary muscle as a whole acts as a sphincter, therefore, when 
its muscle fibres, both radial and circular contract, the 
choroid is pulled towards the lens reducing the tension on 
the suspensory ligaments. This allows the lens to assume a 
more spherical form because of its own elastic nature. Now 
lens can cause more refraction needed for accommodation.
Iris
The iris is a contractile diaphragm between the cornea and 
the lens. An opening in its centre is called the pupil. The iris 
is attached at its periphery to the middle of the anterior 
surface of the ciliary body. Peripheral to this attachment the 
ciliary body and narrow rim of sclera form the iridocorneal 
angle.
Structure
The iris consists of four layers; from before backwards, these 
are as follows:
1. An anterior mesothelial lining.
2. A connective tissue stroma containing pigment cells and 
blood vessels.
3. A layer of smooth muscle, which consists of two parts.
(a) Constrictor pupillae—an inner (near the margin of 
the pupil) part made of circular fibres.
(b) Dilator pupillae—a peripheral part made up of 
radial fibres.
Nerve supply: Constrictor pupillae is supplied by the 
parasympathetic fibres and dilator pupillae by the 
sympathetic fibres.
 
Actions: The constrictor and dilator pupillae constricts 
and dilates the pupil, respectively.
4. A posterior layer of pigment cells, which is continuous 
with the ciliary part of the retina.
INNER NERVOUS COAT OF THE EYEBALL (RETINA)
The retina is the innermost coat of the eyeball (Fig. 19.22). It 
consists of two layers, viz.
1. An outer pigment layer.
2. An inner sensory layer.
The space between the two layers contains a gummy substance 
that glues the two layers.
Fig. 19.22 Structure of the retina.
Pigmented
epithelium
Cones
Rods
Bipolar
neurons
Ganglion
cells
Optic
nerve
--- Page 312 ---
Orbit and Eyeball
The retina is present between the choroid and the hyaloid 
membrane of the vitreous. The retina diminishes in thickness 
from behind forwards. Anteriorly, it presents an irregular 
edge called ora serrata.
Structure
The outer layer of the retina is insensitive to light and 
made up of pigmented cuboidal epithelium.
2. The inner sensory layer of the retina is sensitive to light 
and is made up of photoreceptors cells called rods and 
cones; as well as numerous relay neurons, viz. bipolar 
neurons and ganglion cells. The very thin non-cellular 
continuation of the retina in front of the ora serrata 
covers the ciliary body and iris. Thus the photosensitive 
part of the retina lines the inner surface of the eyeball 
posterior to the ciliary body. The nerve fibres arising 
from its ganglion cells covers inner surface and collect in 
the inferomedial region, where they pierce the outer two 
coats of eyeball and emerge as the optic nerve.
N.B. Histologically, the retina is composed of following 10 
layers: 
1. Outer pigmented layer
2. Layer of rods and cones (photoreceptor cells)
3. External limiting membrane
4. Outer nuclear layer (Cell bodies of rods and cones)
5. Outer plexiform layer
6. Inner nuclear layer (Cell bodies of bipolar neurons)
7. Inner plexiform layer
8. Ganglion cell layer
9. Nerve fibre layer
10. Internal limiting membrane
Blood Supply
The deeper part of the retina, i.e., up to the bipolar neurons 
is supplied by the central artery of the retina (a branch of the 
ophthalmic artery), while the superficial part of the retina up 
to the rods and cones is nourished by diffusion from the 
capillaries of the choroid.
Venous Drainage
It is by central vein of the retina, which drains into the cavernous 
sinus.
Development of the Retina (Fig. 19.23)
The retina develops from a hollow outgrowth the optic 
vesicle from diencephalon of primitive brain. The optic vesicle 
becomes invaginated to form the optic cup, consisting of two 
layers of cells. The outer layer differentiates to form the pigment 
cell layer and the inner layer differentiates to form the neural 
layer. The neural layer forms the remaining layers of the retina 
with photoreceptor cell (rods and cones) outermost, i.e., next 
to pigment cells. The ganglion cells are innermost. Therefore 
light has to pass through them to stimulate the rods and 
cones.
The two layers of optic cup remain separate during 
embryonic period but fuse later during early fetal period with 
potential space between the two. Therefore in retinal 
detachment, the plane of cleavage is between pigment cell layer 
and neural layer.
• Retinal detachment: In retinal detachment there is 
separation of two layers of the retina (i.e., pigment and 
neural layers).
• Appearance of the retina as seen through an 
ophthalmoscope: The posterior region of retina (fundus) 
can be examined by an ophthalmoscope, a procedure 
called 
fundoscopy 
(funduscopic 
examination). The 
following features are observed (Fig. 19.24):
– Macula lutea, a pale yellowish area near the posterior 
pole.
It is approximately 4  mm in diameter. A small pit 
(1.5  mm in diameter) in its center is called fovea 
centralis, which is the point where light is normally 
focused.
The fovea is the portion of retina with maximum 
concentration of cone receptors, hence the site of 
greatest visual acuity, i.e., the ability to see the fine 
images (keenest vision).
Clinical correlation
Fig. 19.23 Stages in the development of the retina.
Optic
stalk
Optic
Outer layer of
the optic cup
Pigment epithelium
(pigment cell layer)
Inner layer of
the optic cup
Optic
vesicle
Light sensitive
neural layer
--- Page 313 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
– Optic disc (1.5  mm in diameter), a white spot about 
3 mm medial to the macula. The depressed area in the 
center is called physiological cup.
The nerve fibres from retina meet and pass through 
this region (optic disc) of the eyeball to form the optic 
nerve. The blood vessels of retina also pass through 
this spot.
Since there are no photoreceptor cells in the optic 
disc, it does not respond to the light. Therefore, the 
optic disc is also called blind spot.
– The central artery of the retina enters the eye through the 
center of the optic disc. It divides into superior and 
inferior branches. Each of them further divides into 
temporal and nasal branches. The retinal veins follow the 
arteries. The branches of the central artery of retina are 
seen radiating over the edges of the optic disc. They are 
smaller and paler than veins. At points where they cross 
veins, the vein wall can be seen through the artery. 
The normal optic disc appears as a cup-shaped area paler 
than the surrounding area (fundus). The edges of the disc 
are sharp and well-defined.
The congestion of the optic disc from increased 
intracranial pressure is called papilledema in which the 
optic cup is obscured and the disc margin is blurred.
N.B. The fovea centralis is the thinnest part of retina and its 
size is comparable to optic disc.
ARTERIAL SUPPLY OF THE EYEBALL
The eyeball is supplied by the following arteries (Fig. 19.25):
1. Central artery of the retina.
2. Long and short posterior ciliary arteries.
3. Anterior ciliary arteries.
In the region of ciliary body, a major arterial circle is formed 
by the anastomosis between long posterior ciliary artery and 
anterior ciliary artery. From major arterial circle the vessel 
passes centripetally and anastomoses close to the pupillary 
margin to form the minor arterial circle.
COMPARTMENTS OF THE EYEBALL
The interior of the eyeball is divided into two compartments 
by the lens: a small anterior compartment in front of the lens 
and a large posterior compartment behind the lens (Fig. 19.26) :
1. Anterior compartment: It is divided into two chambers: 
a smaller anterior chamber and a larger posterior chamber.
The anterior chamber lies between the iris and cornea 
and posterior chamber between iris and lens. The two 
compartments communicate with each other through 
pupil.
The two chambers are filled with an aqueous 
humour, which helps in maintaining the intraocular 
pressure. The aqueous humour is rich in ascorbic acid, 
glucose, and amino acids. It nourishes the cornea and 
the lens which are otherwise avascular.
Circulation of aqueous humour: The aqueous humour is 
secreted in the posterior chamber by the ciliary processes. 
From here it passes into the anterior chamber through the 
pupil. Here it passes through the spaces in the iridocorneal 
angle, located between the fibres of ligamentum pectinatum
and then enter into the canal of Schlemm, from where it is 
drained by the anterior ciliary veins.
Fig. 19.24 Features in the fundus of eye as seen during ophthalmoscopy: A, actual photograph; B, schematic diagram of 
fundus. (Source: Fig. 8.102, Page 852, Gray's Anatomy for Students, Richard L Drabe, Wayne Vogl, Adam WM Mitchell. 
Copyright Elsevier Inc. 2005, All rights reserved.)
Macula lutea with fovea centralis
Optic disc
Central
vein of
retina
Optic disc
Central
artery of
retina
Inferior
nasal branch
Inferior temporal
branch
Fovea
centralis
Macula
lutea
Superior temporal
branch
Superior nasal
branch
--- Page 314 ---
Orbit and Eyeball
2. Posterior compartment: It is behind the lens and much 
larger than the anterior compartment (comprising 
four-fifth of the eyeball). It is surrounded almost 
completely by the retina and is filled with colorless, 
transparent jelly-like substance called vitreous humour/
vitreous body. The vitreous humour is enclosed in a 
delicate hyaloid membrane. Anteriorly, the hyaloid 
membrane forms a depression the hyaloid fossa in which 
rests the lens. The vitreous humour helps in maintaining 
intraocular pressure and therefore the shape of the 
eyeball. Further, it holds the lens and the retina in place. 
The hyaloid canal extends from optic disc to the lens. 
The canal marks the site of the hyaloid artery in the fetus. 
The hyaloid artery is a continuation of central artery of 
the retina which disappears 6 weeks before birth.
LENS
The lens is an unusual biological structure. It is a 
transparent, biconvex body, 1 cm in diameter and 4 mm 
thick, placed between the anterior and posterior 
compartments of the eyeball.
External Features
The lens presents the following external features:
1. Anterior and posterior surfaces.
2. Anterior and posterior poles.
3. A circumference—the equator.
The line connecting the anterior and posterior poles is called 
the axis of the lens.
Structure
The lens is enclosed in a transparent elastic capsule. Anteriorly 
deep to capsule lies capsular epithelium. In the center, the 
epithelium is made up of a single layer of cuboidal cells. The 
cells at periphery prolongate to give rise to lens fibres. These 
fibres get arranged concentrically and form the lens substance. 
The center (nucleus) of the lens consists of oldest fibres. Here 
the lens fibres lose their nuclei and organelles. As a result, a 
special set of proteins called crystallines lie in the center. The 
center of the lens is, therefore, hard. The periphery of the lens 
(cortex) is soft because it is made up of more recently formed 
fibres.
• Presbyopia (short vision): The lens plays an important 
role in accommodation. The lens absorbs much of the 
ultraviolet light and becomes increasingly yellowish with 
age. It also becomes harder with age. As a result of which 
the power of accommodation is lessened in old age 
producing a clinical condition called presbyopia.
Clinical correlation
Fig. 19.26 Compartments of the eyeball.
Fig. 19.25 Arterial supply of the eyeball.
Choroid
Rectus muscle
Iris
Minor
arterial circle
Major
arterial circle
Anterior
ciliary artery
Short posterior ciliary artery
Long posterior ciliary artery
Central artery of
retina
Pia mater
Dura mater
Arachnoid mater
Subarachnoid space
Optic nerve
Lens
Ciliary body
Limbus
Iridocorneal
angle
Posterior
compartment
Anterior
compartment
Canal of Schlemm
Lens
Hyaloid
membrane
Hyaloid
fossa
Optic disc
Optic nerve
Fovea centralis
Vitreous body
Posterior chamber
Anterior chamber
Iris
Pupil
Glaucoma: If the drainage of aqueous humour is blocked, 
there occurs an abnormal increase in the intraocular 
pressure—a condition called glaucoma. As a result, there is 
severe pain in the eye due to pressure on the highly sensitive 
cornea.
The glaucoma may cause variety of visual problems, 
viz. blindness due to compression of retina and its blood 
supply.
The intraocular pressure which normally is about 
15  mmHg can be measured on anesthetized cornea 
(tonometry).
Clinical correlation
--- Page 315 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
• Cataract: The opacity of the lens is termed cataract. With 
increasing age and in certain disease states, the lens 
becomes opaque. The increasing opacity leads to 
increasing visual impairment. This can be treated 
surgically by excision of opaque lens and replacement 
with an artificial lens.
Suspensory Ligaments of the Lens (Zonule of Zinn)
The lens is suspended between the anterior and posterior 
compartments of the eye by suspensory ligaments of the 
lens. These ligaments extend from ciliary body to the lens 
capsule mostly in front.
FUNCTIONS OF THE EYE
The main function of the eye is focusing of light waves and 
stimulation of photoreceptors of the retina. This requires 
five basic processes, viz.
1. Transmission of light waves through transparent media 
of the eyeball.
2. Refraction (bending) of light waves through different 
refractive media of different densities.
3. Accommodation of the lens to focus the light waves.
4. Regulation of amount of light entering the eye through 
pupil by iris diaphragm.
5. Convergence of eyeballs.
The stimulation of photoreceptors of retina generates 
action potentials that are relayed through the optic path-
ways to the visual cortex of the brain, where image is 
formed. The visual impairment may result if any one or 
more of these processes fail to function properly.
REFRACTIVE MEDIA OF THE EYE
These include:
1. Cornea (very refractive but not adjustable).
2. Aqueous humour.
3. Lens (refractive and adjustable).
4. Vitreous humour/vitreous body.
All these media together form the refractive apparatus of the 
eye.
N.B. Most of the refraction by eye takes place at the anterior 
surface of the cornea (not in the lens as generally thought).
--- Page 316 ---
Orbit and Eyeball
A 66-year-old person visited his family physician and 
complained of headache and blurring of vision. He 
referred him to an ophthalmologist, who on 
ophthalmoscopic examination found papilledema 
(edema of optic discs) and congestion of retinal veins. 
CT scan of his head revealed a large intracranial tumor 
in the region of the posterior cranial fossa.
Questions
1. What is an optic disc?
2. Describe the development of optic nerve and retina.
3. How does intracranial tumor cause papilledema.
Answers
1. The optic disc is a white spot (or plate area) about 
3 mm medial to the posterior pole of eye—seen on 
ophthalmoscopic examination. The nerve fibres 
from retina leave the eyeball at this site to become 
the optic nerve. This area is devoid of photoreceptor 
cells. The central artery of retina enters and 
tributaries of central vein of retina leave the eyeball 
through the centre of the optic disc. The region of 
optic disc does not respond to light due to absence 
of photoreceptor cells (rods and cones), hence it is 
also called the blind spot.
2. The optic nerve and retina develop from optic stalk 
and optic cup, respectively. The optic stalk and 
optic cup are derived from diencephalon as hollow 
outgrowth. The optic nerve being derived from 
brain is surrounded by three meninges.
3. The optic nerve is surrounded by three meninges 
of the brain, up to its entry in the eyeball, and the 
subarachnoid space filled with CSF is continuous 
with subarachnoid space around the brain. As a 
result, rise in intracranial pressure (and hence CSF 
pressure) due to intracranial tumor, the central 
vein of retina traversing the subarachnoid space 
around optic nerve is compressed. This leads to 
venous congestion and edema of the optic disc 
called papilledema.
Clinical Case Study
Golden Facts to Remember
  Most important content of the orbit
Eyeball
  All structures within the orbit lie inside the 
orbital periosteum except
Infraorbital nerve and vessels and zygomatic nerve, which 
lie outside the orbital periosteum
  White of the eye
Sclera
  Uvea (or uveal tract)
Consists of choroid, ciliary body, and iris
  Weakest site of sclera
Lamina cribrosa
  Site of keenest vision in retina
Fovea centralis
  Blind spot of the retina
Optic disc
  Maximum refraction by the eye takes place at
Anterior surface of the cornea
  Most successful homotransplant (i.e., between 
the individuals of the same species)
Corneal transplant
  Most important branch of ophthalmic artery
Central artery of the retina
  All the extraocular muscles are supplied by 
the oculomotor nerve except
Lateral rectus (supplied by the abducent nerve) and 
superior oblique (supplied by the trochlear nerve)
  Canal of Schlemm
Circular vascular channel within sclera just behind the 
corneoscleral junction
  Refractive apparatus of the eye
Consists of cornea, aqueous humour, lens, and vitreous 
humour
  Tenon’s capsule
Thin membranous sheath enclosing the eyeball
  Most common of all eye operations
Cataract extraction
--- Page 317 ---
Vertebral Canal and 
Its Contents
CHAPTER
The vertebral canal is an elongated cavity inside the vertebral 
column. The vertebral column consists of 33 segments/
vertebrae lying one above the other. They are grouped 
according to the body regions as follows: 7 cervical, 12 
thoracic, 5 lumbar, 5 sacral, and 4 coccygeal vertebrae. In 
general, each vertebra consists of two parts: a ventral body
and a dorsal neural arch, which enclose between them the 
vertebral foramen (for details see General Anatomy, Chapter 8: 
Vertebral Column by Vishram Singh).
The vertebral canal is a collective name given to the whole 
series of vertebral foramina lying one above the other when 
the vertebrae are held together in the vertebral column.
In human body both in vivo and in vitro, the vertebral 
canal is a smooth-walled space bounded anteriorly by the 
vertebral bodies, intervertebral discs, and the posterior 
longitudinal ligament; and posteriorly by the vertebral 
laminae and ligamenta flava. On each side, it is bounded by 
the pedicles of vertebrae with intervening large intervertebral 
foramen.
The vertebral canal is continuous above with the cranial 
cavity and below with the sacral canal. The latter is considered 
as the part of the vertebral canal.
CONTENTS OF THE VERTEBRAL CANAL
The vertebral canal contains spinal cord surrounded by its 
meninges. The bony wall of the canal is separated from the 
spinal meninges by the epidural space.
The contents of vertebral canal are summarized as follows:
1. Epidural space.
2. Spinal meninges.
3. Spinal cord with its nerve roots.
EPIDURAL SPACE
The epidural space lies between the spinal dura and the 
periosteum lining the vertebral canal. It is filled with loose 
areolar tissue and semiliquid fat and contains (a) minute 
spinal arteries and (b) a network of veins—the internal 
vertebral venous plexus (Fig. 20.1).
Spinal Arteries
These are segmental arteries, which arise from ascending 
cervical and deep cervical arteries in the cervical region, 
from posterior intercostal arteries in the thoracic region, from 
lumbar arteries in the lumbar region, and lateral sacral 
arteries in the sacral region. They enter the vertebral canal 
through intervertebral foramina along the spinal nerve roots. 
They supply spinal cord, its nerve roots and meninges, and 
the surrounding bones and ligaments.
Internal Vertebral Venous Plexus (Fig. 20.2)
The internal vertebral venous plexus is a network of veins in 
the epidural space of the vertebral canal and extends 
throughout the length of the vertebral canal. These veins 
correspond to the dural venous sinus within the cranial cavity 
and are continuous with them through the foramen magnum.
The plexus is drained by four subordinate longitudinal 
channels: two posterior and two anterior.
The anterior part of plexus receives large basivertebral veins
(main tributaries) draining the active red narrow within the 
bodies of the vertebrae and sends efferent intervertebral veins 
through intervertebral foramina to drain into external 
vertebral plexus, which in turn drains into segmental veins.
Fig. 20.1 Schematic transection of the vertebral canal 
showing its contents.
Subarachnoid
space
Ventral root
Vertebral canal
Dorsal root
Subdural space
Epidural space
Pia mater
Arachnoid mater
Dura mater
Internal
vertebral
venous
plexus
--- Page 318 ---
Vertebral Canal and Its Contents
The segmental veins are body wall veins, viz. vertebral, 
posterior intercostal, lumbar, and lateral sacral veins.
Apart from draining venous blood from the vertebrae, the 
internal vertebral venous plexus receives veins from spinal 
meninges and spinal cord.
External Vertebral Venous Plexus (Fig. 20.2)
The external vertebral venous plexus lies outside the vertebral 
column and consists of anterior vessels lying in front of 
vertebral bodies and posterior vessels lying on the back of 
the vertebral arches. The anterior and posterior vessels 
communicate with each other and with the internal vertebral 
venous plexus. All these veins are devoid of valves.
N.B. The veins of internal and external venous plexuses and 
their connecting veins do not have valves in their lumen. 
Consequently the blood flows within these veins in both 
directions.
The internal venous plexus provides a venous bypass when 
the inferior vena cava fails to cope with sudden flush of 
blood resulting from sudden increase of intra-abdominal 
pressure as during coughing and straining. It transmits 
venous blood from areas of high venous pressure, e.g., from 
the tributaries of inferior vena cava (lateral sacral and 
lumbar veins) to the tributaries of superior vena cava 
(posterior intercostal and vertebral veins). Thus pelvic 
tumors, especially cancer prostate, can spread to vertebral 
bodies and even to skull without having to pass through 
heart and lungs and produce secondaries at these sites.
Clinical correlation
SPINAL MENINGES
The spinal cord is surrounded by three coverings called 
meninges (Fig. 20.3). From superficial to deep, these are as 
follows:
1. Spinal dura mater.
2. Spinal arachnoid mater.
3. Spinal pia mater.
The potential space between the dura and arachnoid maters 
is termed as subdural space, while the large space between the 
arachnoid mater and pia mater is known as subarachnoid 
space.
Spinal dura mater
It is the prolongation of the inner meningeal layer of cranial 
dura mater and extends from foramen magnum to the lower 
border of S2 vertebra. It is attached firmly to the foramen 
magnum, the tectorial membrane and the posterior 
longitudinal ligament on the body of axis vertebra. Elsewhere 
it lies free in the vertebral canal. The lower blind end of dural 
tube is pierced by filum terminale in its center.
The spinal dura is pierced segmentally by dorsal and 
ventral roots of the spinal nerves and prolonged over these 
roots as sleeve-like projections, which enter the intervertebral 
foramina and ends by fusing with the epineurium of the 
spinal nerves. The recurrent meningeal branches of the 
spinal nerves supply the spinal dura.
Subdural space: It is a potential space between the spinal 
dura and arachnoid mater containing a thin film of serous 
fluid, which acts as a lubricant. As a result, the dura mater 
can freely move over the arachnoid. The subdural space is 
Fig. 20.2 Vertebral venous plexus.
Longitudinal
venous channels
Internal vertebral
venous plexus
Dura mater
Epidural space
External vertebral venous plexus
(anterior part)
Segmental
vein
Basivertebral
vein
Intersegmental
vein
External vertebral
venous plexus
(posterior part)
Subdural space
Ligamentum
denticulatum
Trunk of
spinal nerve
Ventral
ramus
Dorsal
ramus
Arachnoid mater
Dura mater
Pia mater
Intervertebral
foramen
Subarachnoid space
Subarachnoid
septum
Fig. 20.3 Schematic transverse section of the spinal cord 
showing meninges and formation of meningeal sheaths 
onto the spinal nerve roots.
--- Page 319 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
prolonged to a short distance around the roots of the spinal 
nerves.
Spinal arachnoid mater
It is a thin transparent vascular membrane that loosely 
invests the spinal cord. Above it is continuous with the 
arachnoid mater surrounding the brain and below it extends 
up to the lower border of second sacral vertebra. It is 
separated from pia mater by the subarachnoid space. The 
arachnoid mater sends many delicate thread like processes 
across the subarachnoid space to the pia mater forming a 
spider’s web-like arrangement.
Subarachnoid space: The subarachnoid space is a relatively 
large space between arachnoid mater and pia mater. It is 
filled with cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), which forms about half 
of the total volume of CSF (i.e., 75 ml out of 150 ml). It 
communicates with the subarachnoid space around the 
brain at the foramen magnum. Below the level of conus 
medullar is (lower conical end of spinal cord) the space is 
quite roomy (called lumbar cistern) and contains only cauda 
equina and filum terminale in a pool of CSF. The lumbar
puncture is usually done in this region between the L3 and L4 
vertebra.
Spinal pia mater
It is a vascular membrane that closely invests the spinal cord. 
The pia mater is modified at some places. These modifications 
are called processes of pia mater.
Processes of pia mater
Filum terminale: It is a delicate thin thread-like 
prolongation of pia mater beyond the conus medullaris. It 
is about 20 cm long and extends from tip of conus 
medullaris to the base of the coccyx. It pierces the dural 
tube, passes through the sacral canal and sacral hiatus to 
gain attachment on the dorsum of the first piece of the 
coccyx. The filum terminale is divided into two parts: 
filum terminale internum and filum terminale externum.
The filum terminale internum is about 15 cm long and 
lies within the dural sac.
The filum terminale externum is 5 cm long and lies 
outside the dura mater.
2. Ligamenta denticulata: On each side between the dorsal 
and ventral nerve roots, the pia mater forms narrow 
ribbon-like 
transparent 
bands 
called 
ligamenta
denticulata. The lateral margin of each ligamentum 
denticulatum sends 21 teeth-like projections, which pass 
through subarachnoid space and arachnoid mater to 
gain attachment on the inner surface of the dural tube 
between the points of emergence of two adjacent spinal 
nerves. Thus ligamenta denticulata helps to anchor the 
spinal cord in the middle of the subarachnoid space. The 
first tooth of ligamentum denticulatum is at the level of 
the foramen magnum, while the last tooth lies between 
T12 and L1 spinal nerves (Fig. 20.4).
3. Linea splendens: It is a thickened band of pia mater 
along the anterior median fissure of the spinal cord.
4. Subarachnoid septum: It is a fenestrated pial septum in 
the midsagittal plane, which connects the pia mater with 
arachnoid mater posteriorly. Posteriorly, the pia mater is 
also attached to the posterior median septum of the 
spinal cord.
• Lumbar puncture: The lumbar puncture is done to draw 
CSF from subarachnoid space for diagnostic and 
therapeutic purposes. The needle is inserted between L3 
and L4 or L4 and L5 vertebrae with patient’s back flexed 
either in sitting position or lying on a bed in left lateral 
position, usually the later when patient is curled up lying on 
left side. The needle passes through the supraspinous and 
interspinous ligaments and between ligamenta flava before 
piercing the dura mater. As the dura mater is pierced, there 
is a distinct feel of give way. Since the spinal cord ends at 
the lower border of L1 vertebra, there is no danger of 
damage to the spinal cord (for details see Clinical and 
Surgical Anatomy by Vishram Singh).
• Spinal anesthesia: To give spinal anesthesia, the 
anesthetic solution is injected into the subarachnoid 
space. It mixes up with CSF surrounding the spinal nerve 
roots which get anesthetized. The procedure is same as 
that of lumbar puncture.
• Epidural anesthesia: To give epidural anesthesia, the 
anesthetic solution is injected into the epidural space at 
the desired site without piercing the dura mater. The 
solution infiltrates through the meningeal sheaths 
around the nerve roots, which consequently get 
anesthetized.
Clinical correlation
Fig. 20.4 Posterior view of part of the spinal cord showing 
ligamenta denticulata.
Posteromedian
sulcus
Posterolateral
sulcus
Spinal cord
Denticulate
ligament
T12 spinal nerve
Last tooth of
ligamentum
denticulatum
L1 spinal nerve
--- Page 320 ---
Vertebral Canal and Its Contents
SPINAL CORD
The spinal cord is the long (average length 45 cm) lower 
cylindrical part of the central nervous system occupying the 
upper two-thirds of the vertebral canal. It begins at the 
foramen magnum as the continuation of medulla oblongata 
and usually terminates opposite the intervertebral disc 
between the L1 and L2 vertebrae. In the fetus, the spinal cord 
extends up to the level of the lower border of S2 vertebra.
The functions of the spinal cord are as follows:
1. Transmission of information to and fro between body 
and brain.
2. Execution of simple reflexes.
External Features
The spinal cord is cylindrical structure, somewhat flattened 
anteroposteriorly. Its lower end tapers into a cone forming 
the conus medullaris. The spinal cord gives origin to 31 pairs 
of spinal nerves. The girth of spinal cord increases 
considerably in the regions that give origin to large nerves of 
the limbs. These enlargements are known as cervical and 
lumbar swellings/enlargements. The spinal cord presents the 
following external features:
1. Fissures and sulci.
2. Attachments of spinal nerve roots.
3. Enlargements of the spinal cord.
Fissures and sulci
The anterior aspect of spinal cord possesses a deep midline 
groove called anterior median fissure. It extends along the 
entire length of the spinal cord. On either side of anterior 
median fissure it presents anterolateral sulci. The posterior 
aspect of the spinal cord presents a shallow posterior median 
sulcus, from which a posterior median septum of neuroglial 
tissue extends into the substance of the cord to a variable 
extent.
Attachments of spinal nerve roots
The anterior and posterior roots of the spinal nerve unite 
within the intervertebral foramina. The anterior root is formed 
by 3 or 4 or rootlets, which emerge along the anterolateral 
sulcus of the spinal cord. The posterior root is formed by 
several rootlets, which are attached to the posterolateral sulcus
of the spinal cord. A short distance from the cord the rootlets 
unite to form a single root. The anterior and posterior roots 
pass to their appropriate intervertebral foramina, where each 
evaginates dura mater separately before uniting to form the 
nerve trunk. The ganglion on the posterior root lies in the 
intervertebral foramen, within the tubular evagination of 
dura and arachnoid proximal to the point of union of anterior 
and posterior nerve roots.
At all levels from C1 to L1 vertebrae, the anterior and 
posterior nerve roots pass in front of and behind the 
ligamentum denticulatum, respectively.
Since the spinal cord is shorter than the vertebral canal, 
the course of spinal nerve roots in the vertebral canal to 
reach the appropriate intervertebral foramen varies.
The upper cervical nerve roots pass almost horizontally, 
the thoracic nerve roots pass obliquely, while lumbar and 
sacral nerve roots descend almost vertically downwards 
forming the cauda equina.
The cauda equina is a leash of lumbar (except L1), sacral, 
and coccygeal nerve roots around the filum terminale in the 
pool of CSF. It is so named because the lower end of the spinal 
cord along with the aforementioned structures resembles the 
tail of a horse (cauda = tail, equina = horse).
Exit of spinal nerves: All the spinal nerves exit out of 
vertebral canal through an intervertebral foramen except the 
following ones:
 C1 spinal nerve emerges above the posterior arch of atlas 
vertebra.
 C2 emerges between the posterior arch of atlas and axis 
vertebra.
 S5 and CX 1 emerge through lower end of the sacral canal. 
Other sacral nerves have separate sacral foramina for each 
ramus.
Spinal ganglia: These are collection of nerve cell bodies of 
pseudounipolar neurons. The nerve cell bodies give rise to 
sensory fibres (peripheral processes) in the peripheral nerve 
and nerve fibres (central processes) in the dorsal root on which 
the ganglion lies. There is no synapse in the spinal ganglia.
N.B. All the spinal ganglia lie in the intervertebral foramina 
except the sacral and coccygeal, which lie in the sacral canal 
and the first two cervical, which lie in the corresponding 
position above and below the first cervical vertebra, behind 
the articular facets.
Spinal segments: The portion of spinal cord which gives 
origin to a pair of spinal nerves is termed spinal segment.
(The spinal segments are not visible on the surface.) Thus 
the spinal cord consists of 31 spinal segments. The size of 
segment depends upon the amount of tissue supplied by 
each segment.
Due to relative shortening of the spinal cord as compared 
to the vertebral canal, the spinal segments lie above their 
corresponding vertebral level, a fact of great clinical 
significance in determining the level of vertebral injury from 
signs and symptoms produced due to injury to a particular 
segment. Table 20.1 provides the approximate vertebral levels 
of the spinal segments.
Enlargements of spinal cord
The spinal cord is not uniform in diameter. It presents two 
enlargements in those regions, which supply the upper and 
lower limbs and associated girdles. The two enlargements 
are as follows:
--- Page 321 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
1. Cervical enlargement: In the region of C5–T1 spinal 
segments. The nerves arising from these segments form 
brachial plexus.
2. Lumbar enlargement: In the region of L2–S3 spinal 
segments. The nerves arising from these segments form 
the lumbar plexus.
The vertebral levels of these enlargements are quite different 
from that of spinal segments, viz. cervical enlargement lies 
opposite C3 to T1 vertebrae and lumbar enlargement lies 
opposite T9 to L1 vertebrae.
These enlargements in spinal cord are due to greatly 
increased mass of motor cells in the anterior horns of grey 
matter in these spinal segments.
Internal Structure
The spinal cord consists of a central mass of grey matter made 
up of nerve cells and peripheral mass of white matter made up 
of fibre tracts.
In a cross section of the cord, the grey matter is seen as an 
H-shaped (or butterfly shaped) fluted column, extending 
throughout the length of the spinal cord. It is divided into 
symmetrical right and left comma-shaped masses, which are 
connected across the midline by a transverse grey 
commissure. The central canal of the cord passes through the 
center of the grey commissure. The canal is surrounded by 
substantia gelatinosa centralis. The lateral comma-shaped 
mass of grey matter is divided by a transverse grey 
commissure into a narrow elongated posterior horn and 
broad anterior horn. The posterior horn extends almost up 
to the surface of the cord but anterior horn falls short of it 
(Fig. 20.5).
In the thoracic segments and upper two lumbar segments 
(T1 to L2), a triangular projection juts out from the side of the 
lateral grey mass between the anterior and posterior horns, 
nearly opposite to the grey commissure. It is called the lateral 
horn. The posterior horns are connected to the surface by a 
gelatinous substance called substantia gelatinosa. The amount 
of grey matter and shape of its horns, and amount of white 
matter varies at different levels (Fig. 20.5).
The anterior grey horns are largest in the cervical and 
lumbar enlargements as they are proportional to the volume 
of the tissue supplied by the spinal nerves at these levels. The 
posterior white columns are largest in the cervical region.
Table 20.2 enumerates the characteristic features of the 
spinal segments in different regions of the spinal cord.
Grey Matter
The grey matter of spinal cord consists of (a) nerve cells, 
(b) neuroglia, and (c) blood vessels.
Types of neurons in the grey matter
1. Motor neurons: These are present in the anterior and 
lateral horns.
Types of motor neurons in the anterior horn
(a) Alpha () neurons: They are large multipolar cells 
(25 m or more in diameter) and supply the 
extrafusal skeletal muscle fibres.
(b) Gamma () neurons: They are small multipolar cells 
(15–25 m in diameter) and supply the intrafusal 
muscle fibres of the neuromuscular spindles in skeletal 
muscles.
Types of motor neurons in the lateral horn
 
They are preganglionic autonomic neurons.
N.B. The axons of motor neurons leave the spinal cord as 
the final common path (Sherrington) through the ventral 
roots of the spinal nerves and reach the skeletal muscles.
2. Sensory neurons: These are present in the posterior horn 
and involved in relay of sensory information to the 
different parts of the brain forming ascending tracts; or to 
theother segments of spinal cord forming intersegmental 
tracts.
3. Interneurons: These are small neurons present 
throughout the grey matter of the spinal cord. They 
connect different types of neurons, hence also called 
association neurons. These are either inhibitory or 
excitatory and concerned with integration of segmental 
activities.
Table 20.1 Approximate vertebral levels of the spinal 
segments
Spinal segments
Vertebral levels
Cervical 1–8
Foramen magnum to C6 vertebrae
Thoracic 1–6
C6 – T4 vertebrae
Thoracic 7–12
T4 – T9 vertebrae
Lumbar and sacral
T10 – L1 vertebrae
Fig. 20.5 Cross sections of the spinal cord in the cervical, 
thoracic, and lumbar regions. The shape of sections is given 
on the left side while the shape of anterior and posterior 
horns is given on the right side.
Reticular formation
Cervical
(large and oval)
Thoracic
(small and circular)
Lumbar
(large and circular)
Long and slender
posterior horn
Broad and massive
anterior horn
Slender posterior
horn
Lateral horn
Slender anterior
horn
Bulbous and short
posterior horn
Bulbous and short
anterior horn
--- Page 322 ---
Vertebral Canal and Its Contents
Nerve cell groups in the grey columns of spinal cord
Cell groups in the anterior grey column: Numerous groups 
of motor neurons are found in the cross section of anterior 
grey column, representing several longitudinally arranged 
columns of varying lengths. They are divided into three main 
groups or nuclei: (a) medial, (b) lateral, and (c) central.
Medial group extends along most of the length of the spinal 
cord and innervate the axial musculature of the neck and trunk. 
This is further subdivided into ventromedial and dorsomedial
parts.
Lateral group is confined to the cervical and lumbosacral 
enlargements and supply the limb muscles.
Central group forms three definite nuclei, which are fairly 
localized. These are as follows:
1. Phrenic nucleus in the cervical region (extending from 
C3 to C5 segments) innervates the diaphragm.
2. Lumbosacral nucleus in the lumbosacral region 
(extending from L2 to S3 segments). Its function is 
unknown so far.
3. Spinal nucleus of accessory (XI cranial) nerve in the 
cervical region (extending from C1 to C5 segments) and 
giving origin to the spinal root of accessory nerve.
Cell groups in the posterior grey column: In the posterior 
grey column, the cell groups are arranged into four 
longitudinal columns; from the apex towards the base they 
are:
1. Substantia gelatinosa (of Rolando).
2. Nucleus proprius.
3. Nucleus dorsalis (or Clarke’s column).
4. Visceral afferent nucleus.
Substantia gelatinosa is situated at the apex of the 
posterior grey column and extends throughout the length of 
the spinal cord. It is composed of small neurons (also called 
interneurons). It receives the afferent fibres of the lateral 
division of the posterior nerve roots conveying primarily, the 
pain and temperature sensations. Some of these fibres 
synapse with the interneurons of substantia gelatinosa. The 
substantia gelatinosa is continuous above with the nucleus of 
spinal tract of the trigeminal nerve.
Nucleus proprius is a group of large nerve cells situated 
anterior to the substantia gelatinosa and constitutes the main 
bulk of cells present in the posterior grey column.
It extends along the whole length of the spinal cord and 
receives the fibres from posterior white column that are 
associated with the sense of position and movement 
(proprioception), two-point discrimination, and vibration.
Nucleus dorsalis (Clarke’s column) occupies the medial part 
of the base of the posterior grey column, projecting 
somewhat into the posterior funiculus, and extends from C8 
to L2/L3 segments of the cord and receives proprioceptive 
afferents (muscle and joint sense) and exteroceptive afferents 
(touch and pressure from the trunk and lower limb).
Visceral afferent nucleus is located lateral to the nucleus dorsalis 
and extends from T1 to L2 and from S2 to S4 segments of the 
cord and receives visceral afferents from the dorsal nerve 
roots.
Cell groups in the intermediate (lateral) grey column: The 
cells of the lateral grey column form two nuclei: 
(a) intermediolateral and (b) intermediomedial.
The intermediolateral nucleus extends from T1 to L2 
segments of the cord and gives origin to preganglionic fibres 
of the sympathetic nervous system (thoracolumbar outflow)
which leave the cord along with the anterior nerve roots.
The intermediomedial nucleus extends from S2 to S4 
segments of the cord and gives origin to preganglionic fibres 
of parasympathetic nervous system (sacral outflow), which 
also pass out through the anterior nerve roots of the 
corresponding sacral nerves.
Table 20.2 Characteristic features of the spinal segments as seen in transverse sections at cervical, thoracic, and lumbar 
regions of the spinal cord
Features
Levels
Cervical
Thoracic
Lumbar
Grey matter
Large
Small
Large
Posterior horn
Slender and extends far 
posteriorly
Slender
Bulbous
Anterior horn
Massive
Slender
Bulbous
Lateral horn
Absent
Present
Present only in L1 and L2 
segments
Reticular formation
Well developed
Poorly developed
Absent
Amount of white matter
Massive 
Large (less than in the cervical 
region) 
Less (but slightly less than in the 
thoracic region) 
--- Page 323 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
N.B. Apart from the central grey matter, there are strands 
of grey matter in the lateral white column adjacent to the 
base of the posterior horn, which are termed reticular 
formation.
White Matter
The white matter of the spinal cord surrounds the central 
H-shaped mass of grey matter and mainly consists of nerve 
fibres, the large proportion of them being myelinated, giving 
it a white appearance.
In each half of the spinal cord, the white matter is divided 
into three parts called columns:
1. Posterior white column, between the posterior median 
septum and the posterior horn.
2. Lateral white column, between the anterior and 
posterior horns.
3. Anterior white column, between the anterior median 
fissure and the anterior horn.
The anterior white columns are joined together by the white 
commissure.
Each white column is made up of tracts, which are either 
ascending (sensory) or descending (motor).
N.B. In general, the posterior white column is sensory, the 
anterior column is motor and lateral column is mixed 
(i.e., motor as well as sensory). Further, the ascending tracts 
are located towards the periphery and the descending tracts 
towards the center.
TRACTS OF THE SPINAL CORD
The tracts are defined as collections of nerve fibres within 
the central nervous system, which have same origin, course, 
and termination. They are sometimes referred to as fasciculi
(= bundles) or lemnisci (= ribbons).
The tracts are named after the names of masses of grey 
matter connected by them. Their names usually consist of 
two components (or terms), the first term denotes the origin 
and second the termination of the tract. For example, a tract 
arising in cerebral cortex and terminating in the spinal cord is 
called corticospinal tract. Similarly a tract arising in the 
spinal cord and terminating in the thalamus is called 
spinothalamic tract (Fig. 20.6).
Classification of the Tracts
The tracts of spinal cord are classified mainly into two types: 
descending and ascending (Fig. 20.6).
The distribution of different descending and ascending 
tracts in three white columns (anterior, lateral, and posterior) 
of the spinal cord are summarized in Table 20.3.
Anterior spinothalamic tract
Spino-olivary tract
Lateral spinothalamic tract
Anterior spinocerebellar tract
Posterior spinocerebellar tract
Dorsolateral tract
(of Lissauer)
Fasciculus cuneatus
(tract of Burdach)
Fasciculus gracilis
(tract of Goll)
Hypothalamospinal tract
Lateral corticospinal
(crossed pyramidal) tract
Rubrospinal tract
Lateral reticulospinal tract
Medial reticulospinal tract
Olivospinal tract
Vestibulospinal tract
Tectospinal
tract
Anterior corticospinal
(uncrossed pyramidal) tract
Fig. 20.6 Transverse section of the spinal cord at midcervical level showing main descending (on left side) and ascending 
(on right side) tracts.
Table 20.3 The presence of different tracts in anterior, lateral, and posterior white columns of the spinal cord
Column
Descending tracts
Ascending tracts
Anterior white column
Anterior corticospinal, vestibulospinal, 
tectospinal, medial reticulospinal
Anterior spinothalamic
Lateral white column
Lateral corticospinal, rubrospinal, 
lateral reticulospinal, hypothalamospinal
Lateral spinothalamic, anterior spinocerebellar, posterior 
spinocerebellar, spinotectal
Posterior white column
• Fasciculus gracilis (tract of Goll)
• Fasciculus cuneatus (tract of Burdach)
--- Page 324 ---
Vertebral Canal and Its Contents
DESCENDING TRACTS
The descending tracts conduct the impulses to the spinal 
cord from the brain.
Corticospinal Tracts (Pyramidal Tract; Fig. 20.7)
The lateral and anterior corticospinal tracts mediate 
voluntary motor activities.
The pyramidal tract consists of about one million fibres.
Origin: The most of the fibres of corticospinal tracts arise 
from pyramidal cells (of Betz) of the motor area of the 
cerebral cortex. Some fibres arise from other parts of the 
cortex.
Course: The fibres pass through corona radiata, internal 
capsule, crus cerebri of cerebral peduncles, ventral part of 
the pons, and pyramids of the medulla oblongata. In the 
lower part of the medulla majority of fibres (about 75%) 
cross to the opposite side at the pyramidal decussation of the 
medulla and descend in the lateral white column of the spinal 
cord as the lateral corticospinal tract. The uncrossed fibres 
descend in the anterior white column of the spinal cord as 
the anterior corticospinal tract. The lateral corticospinal tract 
also contains some fibres, which arise from the ipsilateral 
cerebral cortex.
The lateral corticospinal tract lies in the lateral white 
column in front of the posterior horn and medial to the 
posterior spinocerebellar tract. The anterior corticospinal 
tract lies in the anterior white column close to the anterior 
median fissure. Lower down the fibres of anterior 
corticospinal tract also cross to the opposite side in the 
anterior white commissure of the spinal cord at the level of 
their termination.
Termination: The most of the fibres of both lateral and 
anterior corticospinal tracts terminate by synapsing with the 
interneurons, which in turn project to the motor neurons 
(α and γ) of the anterior horn. Only 2% of the fibres synapse 
directly with the motor neurons.
N.B.
• Because of decussation of corticospinal fibres in the 
medulla (medullary decussation), the cerebral cortex of one 
side controls the muscles of the opposite half of the body.
• As the pyramidal tract traverses the brainstem, the 
corticobulbar fibres supply the motor nuclei of the cranial 
nerves. Thus the pyramidal tract also includes 
corticobulbar fibres.
Effects of lesions of pyramidal tract: The lesions of 
pyramidal tract above the level of decussation, i.e., upper 
motor neuron (UMN) lesions result in the loss of voluntary 
movements in the opposite half of the body below the level 
of the lesion. The muscles are not actually paralyzed but 
the control on the motor neuron supplying them, i.e., lower 
motor neurons (LMN) is lost. As a result the tone of mus-
cles is increased leading to spastic paralysis.
Clinical correlation
Rubrospinal Tract
The fibres of this tract arise from the cells of the red nucleus 
(nucleus ruber) located in the midbrain and immediately 
caudal to red nucleus they decussate with those of the 
opposite side and descend as a compact bundle in the lateral 
white column of the spinal cord, ventral to the lateral 
corticospinal tract. The fibres of this tract end just like those 
of corticospinal tract in the anterior horn cells of the spinal 
cord. This tract forms a part of extrapyramidal system.
Rubrospinal tract facilitates the activity of the flexor muscles 
and inhibits the activity of the extensor antigravity muscles.
Reticulospinal Tract
Lateral reticulospinal tract
This tract lies in the lateral white column. Its fibres arise from 
cells of the reticular formation in the brainstem (midbrain, 
Fig. 20.7 Pyramidal tracts (corticospinal tract is shown in 
red and corticobulbar in blue color).
Internal capsule
Crus cerebri of
midbrain
Basilar part of pons
Pyramid of medulla
Anterior corticospinal
tract
Face
Trunk and
upper limb
Lower limb
Motor cortex
Lower motor neuron
of spinal cord
Lateral corticospinal
tract
Hypoglossal nerve
Trigeminal nerve
Oculomotor nerve
--- Page 325 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
pons, and medulla) and relay in the anterior horn cells. This 
tract exerts facilitatory influence on the motor neurons, which 
supply the skeletal muscles.
Medial reticulospinal tract
It lies in the anterior white column. Its fibres arise from the 
cells of the reticular formation in the medulla and relay in 
the anterior horn cells of the spinal cord. This tract exerts 
inhibitory influence on the motor neurons supplying the 
skeletal muscles.
N.B. The reticulospinal fibres are now thought to be 
included in descending autonomic fibres. The reticulospinal 
tracts thus provide a pathway by which the hypothalamus 
can control the thoracolumbar sympathetic outflow and the 
sacral parasympathetic outflow.
Hypothalamospinal Tract
It projects from the hypothalamus and descends in the lateral 
white column of the spinal cord on the medial side of the 
lateral corticospinal tract and terminates by synapsing with 
lateral horn cells of T1 to L2 spinal segments responsible for 
sympathetic outflow, and lateral horn cells of S2, S3, and S4 
spinal segments responsible for parasympathetic outflow.
ASCENDING TRACTS
The ascending tracts conduct the impulses from the periphery 
to the brain through the cord.
The important ascending tracts fall into the following three 
types:
1. Those concerned with pain and temperature sensations 
and crude touch, e.g., lateral and anterior spinothalamic 
tracts.
2. Those concerned with fine touch and conscious 
proprioceptive sensations, e.g., fasciculus gracilis and 
fasciculus cuneatus.
3. Those concerned with unconscious proprioception and 
muscular coordination, e.g., anterior and posterior 
spinocerebellar tracts.
Lateral Spinothalamic Tract (Fig. 20.8)
The cell bodies of first-order sensory neurons (pseudounipolar 
neurons) of this tract lie in the dorsal root ganglia of the spinal 
nerves. The central processes of these cells enter the cord 
through the lateral division of the dorsal root of the spinal 
nerves. In the cord, the fibres ascend one or two segments as the 
dorsolateral tract of Lissauer at the tip of posterior horns and 
then relay in the posterior horn by synapsing with the cells of 
substantia gelatinosa. The axons of second-order sensory 
neurons of substantia gelatinosa cross to the opposite side in 
the anterior white commissure and ascend up as lateral 
spinothalamic tract in the opposite lateral white column just 
lateral to the anterior horn. They terminate in the ventral 
posterolateral nucleus (VPL) of the thalamus. The sacral, 
lumbar, thoracic, and cervical fibres are situated in layers in this 
tract from superficial to deep (somatotrophic organization). 
The axons of the third-order sensory neurons project to the 
primary sensory cortex of the cerebral hemisphere.
The fibres of this tract carry pain and temperature 
sensations—the pain fibres being lateral to the temperature. 
The pain fibres become very superficial in the lateral white 
column of the cord in the cervical region. Therefore cordotomy 
can be performed safely at this level to relieve pain in the 
opposite half of the body.
The involvement of decussating fibres of this tract in the 
anterior commissure in syringomyelia leads to bilateral loss of 
pain and temperature sensations below the level of the 
lesion.
Clinical correlation
Anterior Spinothalamic Tract
The cell bodies of the first-order sensory neurons of this 
tract lie in the dorsal root ganglia of the spinal nerves. The 
central processes of these cells (large and heavily myelinated) 
enter the cord through the medial division of the dorsal roots 
of the spinal nerves and ascend in the cord 1 or 2 segments as 
the dorsolateral tract of Lissauer and relay in the substantia 
gelatinosa of the posterior horn. The axons of second-order 
sensory neurons of substantia gelatinosa cross the midline in 
the anterior white commissure and then ascend as ventral 
spinothalamic tract in the opposite anterior white column 
Thalamus
Neuron II
Neuron I
Dorsal root
ganglion
Neuron III
SENSORY CORTEX
Anterior spinothalamic tract
Lateral spinothalamic tract
Fig. 20.8 Lateral and anterior spinothalamic tracts.
--- Page 326 ---
Vertebral Canal and Its Contents
just in front of the anterior horn. These fibres terminate in 
the ventral posterolateral nucleus of the thalamus (Fig. 20.8).
N.B. The lateral spinothalamic tract carries pain and 
temperature sensations whereas anterior spinothalamic tract 
carries sensations of crude touch and pressure.
The damage of anterior spinothalamic tract leads to loss of 
light touch and pressure on the opposite side of the body 
below the level of the lesion.
Clinical correlation
Fasciculus Gracilis (Tract of Goll) and Fasciculus 
Cuneatus (Tract of Burdach)
These two tracts occupy the posterior white column of the 
cord, the tract of Goll being medial to the tract of Burdach. 
They carry sensations of conscious proprioception, two point 
tactile discrimination, and vibration. The cell bodies of the 
first-order sensory neurons lie in the dorsal root ganglia of 
the spinal nerves. The central processes of these cells (thickly 
myelinated) enter the cord through the medial division of the 
roots of spinal nerves and continue in the posterior white 
column as fasciculus gracilis and fasciculus cuneatus 
(Fig. 20.9).
Fibres from the coccygeal, sacral, lumbar, and lower 
thoracic segments ascend up in the tract of Goll, while the 
fibres from the upper thoracic and cervical segments run in 
the tract of Burdach. The cervical, thoracic, lumbar, and 
sacral fibres are arranged in that order from lateral to medial 
in these tracts.
The fibres of fasciculus gracilis and fasciculus cuneatus 
terminate in nucleus gracilis and nucleus cuneatus, 
respectively. The axons of second-order sensory neurons 
from nucleus gracilis and nucleus cuneatus curve 
ventromedially around the central grey matter of the medulla 
as internal arcuate fibres to undergo decussation. The fibres 
after crossing the midline turn upwards as a flat tract called 
medial lemniscus, which courses upwards to terminate in 
the ventral posterolateral nucleus (VPL) of the thalamus. 
The third-order sensory neurons from thalamus project into 
the cerebral cortex of the cerebral hemisphere. This pathway 
carrying conscious proprioceptive sensations is termed 
‘dorsal column—medial lemniscus pathway’.
The involvement of posterior white columns and posterior 
nerve roots in syphilitic degenerative disease called tabes 
dorsalis leads to loss of sense of position. The patient is not 
able to tell the position or movements of his lower limbs 
unless he sees them. Therefore, when he is asked to stand 
up with his feet together and eyes closed, he staggers and 
falls as he cannot maintain his correct position due to lack of 
proprioceptive information (Romberg’s sign).
Clinical correlation
Spinocerebellar Tracts (Fig. 20.10)
The spinocerebellar fibres are located in the lateral white 
column of the cord and are divided into two tracts: posterior 
spinocerebellar tract and anterior spinocerebellar tract
according to their location in the cord. They carry 
unconscious proprioceptive sensations from cord to the 
cerebellum and play an important role in muscular 
coordination.
Posterior (dorsal) spinocerebellar tract
The cell bodies of the first-order sensory neurons lie in the 
dorsal root ganglia of the spinal nerves. The central processes 
of these cells enter the posterior horn of the grey matter 
through posterior roots of spinal nerves and relay in the 
nucleus dorsalis (Clarke’s column). The axons from cells of 
nucleus dorsalis (second-order sensory neurons) pass to the 
dorsolateral part of the white column on the same side and 
ascend as posterior spinocerebellar tract. The fibres of the tract 
enter the cerebellum through the inferior cerebellar pedun-
cle and terminate in the ipsilateral cerebellar cortex.
Anterior (ventral) spinocerebellar tract
The origin and course of the first-order sensory neurons is 
same as that of posterior spinocerebellar tract. The axons 
Thalamus
(VPL)
Sensory cortex
Thalamus
Fasciculus
cuneatus
Internal
arcuate
fibres
Medial
lemniscus
Fasciculus
gracilis
Nucleus gracilis
Nucleus cuneatus
Fig. 20.9 Fasciculus gracilis and fasciculus cuneatus 
(posterior column—medial lemniscus pathway).
--- Page 327 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
of cells of nucleus dorsalis (second-order sensory neurons) 
cross to the opposite side and pass to the anterolateral part of 
the lateral white column of the spinal cord and then ascend to 
form the anterior spinocerebellar tract. The fibres of anterior 
spinocerebellar tract enter the cerebellum through superior 
cerebellar peduncle and terminate in the ipsilateral cerebellar 
cortex.
The input of both posterior and anterior spinocerebellar 
tracts is ipsilateral.
Functionally, both posterior and anterior spinocerebel-
lar tracts carry impulses from the lower limb. The posterior 
tract is concerned with fine movements, whereas anterior 
tract is concerned with gross movements of the limb as a 
whole.
• Subacute combined degeneration of the spinal cord: It 
occurs due to deficiency of vitamin B12. In this condition, 
the posterior white columns and lateral corticospinal tracts 
undergo degeneration on both sides. It usually affects the 
lumbosacral segments. Clinically, it presents with the 
following signs and symptoms:
– Bilateral loss of position and vibratory sense.
– Spastic paraplegia with exaggerated tendon reflexes 
and positive Babinski’s sign.
Clinical correlation
• Spinal cord injury: In complete transection of spinal 
cord, there is loss of movements and all sensations below 
the level of the injured segment.
In hemisection of spinal cord (Brown–Séquard 
syndrome), there is ipsilateral spastic paralysis due to 
lesion of corticospinal tract, contralateral loss of pain and 
temperature sensations and ipsilateral loss of conscious 
proprioception and sense of vibration due to lesions of 
lateral spinothalamic tract and dorsal column-medial 
lemniscus pathway respectively.
To summarize, the motor impulses travel from the brain to 
the anterior horn cells of spinal cord through the descending 
tracts and then out to the periphery via the spinal nerves. 
The sensory impulses from the periphery travel through 
spinal nerves into the spinal cord via posterior or dorsal horn 
and then up the spinal cord to the brain through ascending 
tracts.
BLOOD SUPPLY
Arterial Supply
The spinal cord is supplied by the following arteries:
1. Anterior spinal artery.
2. Posterior spinal arteries.
3. Segmental arteries.
Anterior spinal artery: The anterior spinal artery is formed 
by the union of two small spinal branches of the right and 
left vertebral arteries in the upper cervical canal. It runs 
caudally in the anterior median fissure of the spinal cord 
and terminates along the filum terminale.
Posterior spinal arteries: There are two posterior spinal 
arteries each arising as a small branch from either the 
vertebral or posterior inferior cerebellar artery. Each 
posterior spinal artery runs down on the posterolateral 
aspect of the cord in the posterolateral sulcus along the line 
of attachment of posterior nerve roots and usually divides 
into two collateral arteries along the medial and lateral side 
of the posterior nerve roots. Thus there are five longitudinal 
arteries around the spinal cord.
These arteries are reinforced by the segmental arteries 
(feeder arteries) to form five longitudinal arterial trunks. 
These arterial trunks communicate around the cord forming 
a pial plexus, the vasocorona/arteriae coronae. The arteriae 
coronae give peripheral branches, which supply the 
superficial regions of the cord.
The anterior spinal artery supplies the anterior two-third of 
the cord, while two posterior spinal arteries together supply the 
posterior one-third of the cord.
Fig. 20.10 Schematic diagram to show the posterior (red 
color) and anterior (blue color) spinocerebellar tracts.
Anterior
spinocerebellar
tract
Posterior spinocerebellar
tract
Inferior cerebellar
peduncle
Superior cerebellar
peduncle
Cerebellar
cortex
--- Page 328 ---
Vertebral Canal and Its Contents
Anterior spinal artery syndrome: It occurs due to occlusion 
(thrombosis or compression of the anterior spinal artery).
Since the anterior spinal artery supplies anterior two-third 
of the cord, the occlusion of this artery will result in the 
following signs and symptoms:
(a) Motor symptoms due to involvement of corticospinal 
tracts and anterior grey columns.
(b) Sensory symptoms (viz. bilateral loss of pain and 
temperature 
sensation) 
ischemia 
spinothalamic tracts.
The conscious proprioceptive sensations are preserved 
because the region of posterior white column is supplied by 
posterior spinal arteries.
Clinical correlation
Segmental arteries: The segmental arteries are spinal 
branches of deep cervical, ascending cervical, posterior 
intercostal, lumbar, and lateral sacral arteries. They reach the 
spinal cord as the anterior and posterior radicular arteries 
along the corresponding roots of the spinal nerves, 
respectively. They mainly nourish the nerve roots.
The largest segmental (radicular) arteries at the 1st (T1) 
and 11th thoracic (T11) segmental levels are often termed 
arteria radicularis magna (arteries of Adamkiewicz).
Venous Drainage
The veins draining the cord form six longitudinal venous 
channels around the cord, viz:
1. Two median longitudinal, one in the anterior median 
fissure and the other in the posteromedian sulcus.
2. Two anterolateral, one on either side, posterior to the 
anterior nerve roots.
3. Two posterolateral, one on either side, posterior to the 
posterior nerve roots.
These longitudinal venous channels communicate with the 
internal vertebral venous plexus and drained by veins, which 
leave through the intervertebral foramina to empty into the 
vertebral, posterior intercostal, lumbar, and lateral sacral 
veins.
The internal vertebral venous plexus communicates above 
with the basilar venous plexus.
--- Page 329 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
Golden Facts to Remember
  Most important descending tract of the spinal 
cord
Corticospinal tracts (pyramidal tract)
  Most important ascending tracts of the spinal cord
Lateral and anterior spinothalamic tracts
  Cauda equina
Leash of spinal nerve roots around filum terminale 
arising from conus medullaris, resembling the tail of 
a horse
  Largest artery supplying the spinal cord
Anterior spinal artery
  Artery supplying the most of the substance of 
spinal cord
Anterior spinal artery supplying anterior two-third of 
the cross sectional area of the spinal cord
  Positional changes in the developing spinal cord
– In fetus: S2 vertebra (lower border)
– At birth: L3 vertebra (lower border)
– In adult: L1 vertebra (lower border)
  All the sensory ganglia (spinal ganglia) of spinal 
nerves lie in the intervertebral foramina except
First two cervical, sacral, and coccygeal spinal 
nerves
  Most susceptible spinal segments to ischemic 
necrosis if segmental arteries are occluded
T4 and L1 spinal segments
A 47-year-old patient went to a neurologist and 
complained to him of motor and sensory symptoms, 
which he had noticed in the last few months. After 
thorough neurological examination, he was diagnosed 
as a case of subacute combined degeneration of the spinal 
cord.
Questions
1. What is the cause of subacute combined 
degeneration of the spinal cord?
2. Name the main tracts, which undergo degeneration 
in this condition.
3. Mention the characteristic signs and symptoms of 
this condition.
4. Which spinal segments are usually affected in this 
condition?
Answers
1. Deficiency of vitamin B12.
2. Fasciculus gracilis, fasciculus cuneatus, and lateral 
corticospinal tracts.
3. (a) Bilateral loss of position and vibratory sense 
below the level of lesion.
 
(b) Spastic paralysis with exaggerated tendon 
reflexes and positive Babinski sign.
4. Lumbosacral segments.
Clinical Case Study
--- Page 330 ---
Cranial Cavity
CHAPTER
The cranial cavity is the main cavity of the skull. It lodges the 
brain, meninges, portions of the cranial nerves, and blood 
vessels. It is roofed over by the skull cap and its floor is 
formed by the upper surface of the base of the skull 
(Fig. 21.1).
SKULL CAP (CALVARIA)
The skull cap or the vault of the skull forms the roof of the 
cranial cavity. It is made up of superior portions of frontal, 
parietal, and occipital bones.
External surface: The external surface of the skull cap or 
calvaria has been described in Chapter 2.
Internal surface (Fig. 21.2): The internal surface appears as 
an ovoid hollow plate of bone and presents the following 
features (Fig. 21.2):
1. Coronal, sagittal, and lambdoid sutures.
2. Sagittal sulcus: It is an anteroposterior groove in the 
median plane which lodges the superior sagittal sinus. 
When traced posteriorly, it becomes wider and at 
internal occipital protuberance, it becomes continuous 
with the right transverse sulcus.
3. Granular pits: These are numerous irregular depressions 
on each side of the sagittal sulcus which lodge arachnoid 
granulations. They are more prominent in skulls of 
elderly people.
4. Vascular grooves: These are produced by the terminal 
branches of middle meningeal vessels. Groove for the 
anterior branch is located behind the coronal suture, 
whereas that for the posterior (parietal) branch is more 
posteriorly placed.
Fig. 21.1 Parasagittal section of skull showing anterior, 
middle, and posterior cranial fossae. The inset shows the 
levels of anterior, middle, and posterior cranial fossae akin 
to three terraces with descending levels.
Posterior
cranial fossa (C)
Cerebellum
Tentorium
cerebelli
Midbrain
Floor of
cranial cavity
Temporal lobe of 
cerebral hemisphere
Middle cranial fossa (B)
Anterior cranial fossa (A)
Frontal lobe of
cerebral hemisphere
Roof of cranial cavity
Frontal crest
Frontal bone
Grooves for
meningeal vessels
Coronal suture
Sagittal sulcus
(groove for
superior
sagittal sinus)
Sagittal suture
Granular pits
(for arachnoid
granulation)
Parietal bone
Parietal foramen
Lambdoid suture
Occipital bone
Fig. 21.2 Internal surface of the vault of the skull (calvaria).
--- Page 331 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
The terminal branches of middle meningeal artery 
are separated from bone by their corresponding veins; 
hence, the vascular grooves are mostly produced by the 
veins rather than by the arteries.
5. Parietal foramina: It is one on each side close to the 
sagittal sulcus about 3.5 cm in front of the lambda.
6. Impression for cerebral gyri: They are rather less marked 
as compared to those on the internal surface of the base 
of the skull.
STRUCTURE
The bones of skull cap (cranial vault) consist of outer and 
inner layers/plates of compact bone (generally called outer 
and inner tables) with an intervening layer of the spongy 
bone called diploë.
N.B. In children, the bones of cranial vault are made of a 
single layer of the compact bone.
The outer table is thick, resilient, and tough, whereas the 
inner table is thin and brittle. The blows on head may cause 
fractures of either one or both the tables. When the inner 
table is fractured, it has tendency to shatter and can lacerate 
the underlying vessels within the dura mater. The diploë is 
filled with red bone marrow.
DIPLOIC VEINS
The blood from the diploë is drained by diploic veins 
(Fig. 21.3). These veins drain mostly into the intracranial 
dural venous sinuses. They lack valves and communicate 
with the veins draining the scalp that clothe the cranial vault. 
The recognizable diploic veins are usually four on each side 
and descend almost vertically to open into the nearest 
convenient venous sinus. These are as follows:
1. A frontal diploic vein that emerges from the bone in the 
supraorbital foramen to join the supraorbital vein.
2. An anterior temporal (parietal) diploic vein that
pierces the greater wing of the sphenoid to join the 
sphenoparietal sinus or the anterior deep temporal vein.
3. A posterior temporal (parietal) diploic vein that pierces 
the inner table in the parietomastoid angle to join the 
transverse sinus.
4. An occipital diploic vein (the largest) that pierces the 
inner table near the internal occipital protuberance to 
join the transverse sinus near the confluence of sinuses 
or into an occipital emissary vein.
FLOOR OF THE CRANIAL CAVITY
The floor of the cranial cavity is divisible into three 
descending ‘steps’ by two sharp bony ridges on each side, 
viz. the posterior free border of the lesser wing of the 
sphenoid (sphenoidal ridge) in front, and the sharp 
superior border of the petrous temporal bone (petrous 
ridge) behind (Fig. 21.4).
The three steps are known as the anterior, middle, and
posterior cranial fossae. Thus, the anterior cranial fossa is 
at the highest level, the posterior cranial fossa at the lowest 
level, and the middle cranial fossa at the middle level.
The internal surface of the base of the skull is divided into 
the anterior, middle, and posterior cranial fossae. They are 
arranged like three terraces with descending levels (Fig. 21.1 
inset).
ANTERIOR CRANIAL FOSSA
The anterior cranial fossa lodges the frontal lobes of the 
cerebral hemispheres. Its floor is composed of the portions 
of the following three bones: ethmoid, frontal, and sphenoid 
(Fig. 21.4). It is demarcated from the middle cranial fossa by 
the:
(a) posterior free border of the lesser wing of sphenoid on 
each side, and
(b) anterior border of the sulcus chiasmaticus in the median 
region.
The junction between these two is marked by the anterior 
clinoid process.
Features
The anterior cranial fossa presents the following features:
1. In the median region, from before backward these are:
(a) Frontal crest, a vertical crest on the inner aspect of 
the frontal bone.
(b) Foramen cecum (in between the frontal crest and 
crista galli).
Fig. 21.3 Diploic veins displayed by the removal of the 
outer table of the vault of the skull.
Occipital
diploic vein
Posterior
temporal
diploic vein
Anterior temporal
diploic vein
Frontal
diploic
vein
--- Page 332 ---
Cranial Cavity
(c) Crista galli, a cock’s comb-like bony crest, formed 
by the perpendicular plate of the ethmoid.
(d) Jugum sphenoidale (the superior surface of the 
anterior part of the body of the sphenoid).
(e) On each side of crista galli lies the sieve-like 
cribriform plate of the ethmoid which separates the 
anterior cranial fossa from the nasal cavity. It 
possesses:
 a number of small foramina, to provide passage 
for 15–20 filaments of the olfactory nerve,
 nasal slits one on either side of crista galli to 
provide passage to the anterior ethmoidal nerve, 
 an anterior ethmoid canal along the lateral border 
anteriorly and a posterior ethmoidal canal along 
the lateral border posteriorly to provide passage 
to the anterior and posterior ethmoidal nerve 
and vessels.
2. In the lateral region on either side, the orbital plate of 
the frontal bone separates the anterior cranial fossa from 
the orbit and supports the frontal lobe of the brain with 
consequent impressions of sulci and gyri.
Structures Passing Through Various 
Foramina in the Anterior Cranial Fossa
Foramen cecum
Emissary vein from the nasal mucosa to the anterior end of 
the superior sagittal sinus if foramen is patent.
Cribriform Foramina
Olfactory nerves surrounded by leptomeninges (pia and 
arachnoid maters): from the olfactory epithelium of the 
nasal cavity to the olfactory bulb in the anterior cranial fossa.
Anterior Ethmoidal Foramen
1. Anterior ethmoidal nerve: a branch of the nasociliary 
nerve.
2. Anterior ethmoidal artery: a branch of the ophthalmic 
artery.
3. Anterior ethmoidal vein: a tributary of the ophthalmic 
vein.
Posterior Ethmoidal Foramen
1. Posterior ethmoidal nerve: a branch of the nasociliary 
nerve.
2. Posterior ethmoidal artery: a branch of the ophthalmic 
artery.
3. Posterior ethmoidal vein: a tributary of the ophthalmic 
vein.
Foramen cecum may transmit an emissary vein from the 
nasal cavity to the superior sagittal sinus and then serve as 
a potential route for nasal infections to spread to the 
meninges of the cranial cavity.
Clinical correlation
Frontal air sinuses
Nasal slit
Anterior
Posterior
Ethmoidal
foramina
Foramen cecum
Frontal crest
Hypophyseal fossa
Foramen ovale
Foramen spinosum
Foramen lacerum
Jugular foramen
Cerebellar fossa
Internal occipital crest
Groove for superior sagittal sinus
Groove for transverse sinus
Foramen magnum
Groove for sigmoid sinus
Superior border of petrous
temporal bone
Hypoglossal canal
Dorsum sellae
Posterior clinoid process
Anterior clinoid process
Superior orbital fissure
Posterior border of 
lesser wing of sphenoid
Crista galli
Optic foramen
Foramen rotundum
Internal auditory meatus
Fig. 21.4 Floor of the cranial cavity (the internal surface of the base of the skull).
--- Page 333 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
MIDDLE CRANIAL FOSSA
Floor of the Middle Cranial Fossa (Fig. 21.4)
The floor of the middle cranial fossa resembles a butterfly—
consisting of a small median part and an expanded lateral 
part on each side.
The middle cranial fossa is demarcated from the anterior 
cranial fossa by:
(a) the posterior free border of the lesser wing of the 
sphenoid on each side, and
(b) the limbus sphenoidalis in the median region. The 
limbus is an anterior edge of shallow transverse area 
called sulcus chiasmaticus.
The middle cranial fossa is demarcated from the posterior 
cranial fossa by:
(a) the superior border of the petrous temporal bone on 
each side, and
(b) the dorsum sellae (a rectangular plate of bone) in the 
median region.
Median Part of the Middle Cranial Fossa
The median part of the fossa is formed by the body of the 
sphenoid, which is more or less cuboidal.
The median region, from before backward, presents the 
following features:
1. Sulcus chiasmaticus, leading on each side into the optic 
canal which leads into the orbit.
2. Sella turcica (Turkish saddle). It is the hollowed out 
upper surface of the body of the sphenoid (hypophyseal 
fossa) bounded in front by the tuberculum sellae—the 
posterior edge of sulcus chiasmaticus—and behind by 
the dorsum sellae. The lateral ends of the tuberculum 
sellae bear the middle clinoid processes and the lateral 
ends of the dorsum sellae bear the posterior clinoid 
processes.
The sella turcica consists of three parts: the 
tuberculum sellae, the hypophyseal fossa, and the 
dorsum sellae. The hypophyseal fossa is occupied by the 
pituitary gland in life.
The carotid groove is a shallow sulcus on either side of the 
body of the sphenoid lateral to the hypophyseal fossa. It 
begins at the foramen lacerum, runs upward, then forward, 
and finally upward again to end at the medial to the anterior 
clinoid process. The passage of internal carotid artery 
occupies this groove.
Sometimes the middle and anterior clinoid processes are 
united by a bony bar forming caroticoclinoid foramen for 
the passage of internal carotid artery.
N.B. The median part (region) of the middle cranial fossa is 
likened to a bed with four clinoid processes representing 
the four bed-posts (Gr. Kline = a bed).
Lateral Part of the Middle Cranial Fossa
The lateral part of the middle cranial fossa on each side is 
formed by the upper surface of the greater wing of the 
sphenoid together with the anterior surface of the petrous 
temporal bone and the squamous part of the temporal 
bone. It lodges the temporal lobe of the cerebral hemisphere.
It is limited in front by sharp posterior border of the 
lesser wing of the sphenoid, and behind by sharp upper 
border of the petrous temporal bone. These bony ridges are 
related to the sphenoparietal and superior petrosal sinuses 
respectively.
Greater Wing of the Sphenoid
The greater wing of the sphenoid presents:
1. Four foramina arranged roughly in a semicircular 
array (Fig. 21.5). From behind forward these are as 
follows:
(a) Foramen spinosum is posteriormost and located at 
the posterior tip of the greater wing. It is so called 
because on the undersurface of the greater wing at 
this point is the spine of sphenoid.
(b) Foramen ovale is located just in front and medial to 
the foramen spinosum. The reason for its name is 
obvious.
(c) Foramen rotundum is in front and medial to the 
foramen ovale. It leads downward and forward into 
the pterygopalatine fossa.
(d) Superior orbital fissure (an elongated triangular 
fissure) is in front and lateral to foramen 
rotundum under the overhanging shelf of the 
lesser wing of the sphenoid. It is actually located 
between the body, lesser wing, and greater wing of 
the sphenoid.
Of these four openings, however, only the first 
two can be seen on the inferior surface of the base of 
the skull.
Fig. 21.5 The four foramina in the greater wing of the 
sphenoid are present along a crescentic line.
Superior orbital
fissure
Foramen
rotundum
Emissary sphenoidal foramen
(or foramen of Vesalius)
Foramen ovale
Canaliculus
innominatus
Foramen lacerum
Foramen
spinosum
--- Page 334 ---
Cranial Cavity
N.B. In addition to the four foramina, sometimes two more 
foramina are present in the greater wing of the sphenoid. 
These are:
• Emissary sphenoidal foramen (of Vesalius): It lies medial 
to foramen ovale and conveys an emissary vein from the 
cavernous sinus.
• Canaliculus innominatus: It is located on a bar of bone 
between the foramen ovale and foramen spinosum. It 
transmits the lesser petrosal never when the latter does 
not pass through foramen ovale.
2. Groove for middle meningeal vessels leads forward 
from the foramen spinosum: After a short distance, the 
groove divides into the anterior and posterior grooves, 
which lodge the anterior and posterior branches of 
middle meningeal vessels. The anterior groove 
continues to the pterion and then arches upward and 
backward across the parietal bone. At the pterion, the 
groove may be converted into a bony-tunnel, thereby 
increasing the possibility of tearing the middle 
meningeal vessels in trauma on the side of the skull in 
the pterion region.
The posterior groove passes backward across the 
squamous part of the temporal bone.
3. Foramen lacerum lies at the posterior end of the 
carotid groove on the side of the body of the sphenoid, 
posteromedial to the foramen ovale. It is actually a gap 
between the petrous temporal and sphenoid bones.
4. Anterior surface of the petrous temporal bone presents 
the following five features:
(a) Trigeminal impression, a shallow depression 
medially near the apex of the bone. The trigeminal 
ganglion lies on this depression.
(b) Hiatus and groove for the greater petrosal nerve: In 
front of arcuate eminence, a slit or hiatus for the 
greater petrosal nerve is continued as a groove to the 
foramen lacerum.
(c) Hiatus and groove for the lesser petrosal nerve lie
lateral to hiatus and groove for the greater petrosal 
nerve and lead to the foramen ovale or canaliculus 
innominatus, if present.
(d) Arcuate eminence (a rounded elevation) produced 
by the underlying superior semicircular canal is 
located at the middle of the anterior surface of the 
petrous temporal bone.
(e) Tegmen tympani, a thin plate of bone anterolateral 
to the arcuate eminence. It forms the roof of middle 
ear (tympanic cavity). Its anterior part turns 
downward into the squamotympanic fissure.
The inner surface of the squamous part of the 
temporal bone is grooved by the middle meningeal 
artery and its terminal anterior and posterior branches.
Structures Passing Through Various Canals and 
Foramina in the Middle Cranial Fossa
Optic Foramen
1. Optic nerve: along with its sheath of meninges, i.e., dura 
mater, arachnoid mater, and pia mater.
2. Ophthalmic artery: a branch of cerebral part of the 
internal carotid artery.
3. Sympathetic plexus around the ophthalmic artery.
Superior Orbital Fissure (Fig. 21.6)
This fissure is divided into three parts by means of the 
common tendinous ring of Zinn.
1. Structures passing through the part present within the 
common tendinous ring:
(a) Superior and inferior divisions of the oculomotor 
(3rd cranial) nerve.
(b) Nasociliary nerve: It lies between the two divisions 
of the oculomotor nerve.
(c) Abducent (6th cranial) nerve: It lies lateral to the 
nasociliary nerve.
(d) Sympathetic root of the ciliary ganglion: It lies 
between the nasociliary nerve and the lower 
divisions of the oculomotor nerve.
2. Structures passing through the part present above and 
lateral to the common tendinous ring:
(a) Trochlear (4th cranial) nerve
(b) Frontal nerve
(c) Lacrimal nerve
(d) Lacrimal artery
(e) Superior ophthalmic vein
(f) Recurrent meningeal branch of lacrimal artery.
3. Structures passing through the part present below and 
medial to the common tendinous ring:
Inferior ophthalmic vein
Foramen rotundum
 
(i) Maxillary nerve.
 
(ii) Emissary vein.
Fig. 21.6 Structures passing through the superior orbital 
fissure.
Recurrent
meningeal
branch of
lacrimal
artery
Lacrimal artery
Lacrimal nerve
Frontal nerve
Trochlear nerve
Optic canal
Optic nerve
Ophthalmic artery
Superior division of
oculomotor nerve
Nasociliary nerve
Sympathetic root of
ciliary ganglion
Inferior division of
oculomotor nerve
Inferior
ophthalmic
vein
Abducent
nerve
Superior
ophthalmic vein
--- Page 335 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
Foramen ovale (Mnemonic: MALE)
 
(i) Mandibular nerve.
 
(ii) Accessory middle meningeal artery.
 
(iii) Lesser petrosal nerve.
 
(iv) Emissary vein: connecting the pterygoid venous 
plexus to the cavernous sinus.
Foramen spinosum
 
(i) Middle meningeal artery.
 
(ii) Nerves spinosus.
 
Foramen lacerum (Fig. 21.7)
 
(i) Meningeal branch of the ascending pharyngeal artery.
 
(ii) Emissary vein: from the cavernous sinus to the 
pharyngeal venous plexus.
 
(iii) Internal carotid artery along with the sympathetic 
plexus around it enters it from behind and exists 
above.
 
(iv) Greater petrosal nerve enters from posterolateral 
aspect and leaves anteriorly as a nerve of pterygoid 
canal.
N.B. Internal carotid artery and greater petrosal nerve do 
not pass through and through foramen lacerum.
The greater petrosal nerve joins the deep petrosal nerve 
derived from the sympathetic plexus around the internal 
carotid artery to form the nerve of the pterygoid canal 
(Vidian’s nerve) which passes through the pterygoid canal. 
The posterior orifice of the pterygoid canal lies in the lower 
part of the anterior wall of the foramen lacerum.
Fracture of middle cranial fossa: The middle cranial fossa 
is the commonest site of fracture of the base of the skull. It is 
partly because of its position but also because it is weakened 
by numerous foramina and canals. In fracture of the middle 
cranial fossa, the tegmen tympani is usually fractured and 
the tympanic membrane is torn. As a result, there is bleeding 
from the external acoustic meatus and a leakage of 
cerebrospinal fluid (called cerebrospinal otorrhea).
Clinical correlation
The facial and vestibular cochlear nerves may be dam-
aged. Bleeding may occur through nose and mouth if the 
body of the sphenoid is fractured. Vertigo may occur if semi-
circular canals are involved.
POSTERIOR CRANIAL FOSSA (Fig. 21.4)
The posterior cranial fossa is the deepest of all cranial fossae 
and lies behind the superior border of the petrous temporal 
bone and the dorsum sellae of the sphenoid.
It is formed by portions of the sphenoid, temporal, 
parietal, and occipital bones. It lodges the hindbrain 
consisting of cerebellum, pons, and medulla oblongata. The 
posterior cranial fossa is limited above by the tentorium 
cerebelli (a wide tent-shaped fold of the dura mater) which 
intervenes between the occipital lobes of the cerebral 
hemispheres above and the cerebellum below.
Features
1. The median area presents the following features:
(a) Clivus, a sloping surface in front of foramen 
magnum, formed by the fusion of the posterior part 
of the body of sphenoid with the basilar part of the 
occipital bone. It is separated from the petrous 
temporal bone by petro-occipital fissure which ends 
posteriorly at jugular foramen.
(b) Foramen magnum, the largest foramen of the skull, 
is present in the lowest part of the posterior cranial 
fossa.
On each side of the foramen magnum a little 
above the lateral margin of its anterior part lies the 
hypoglossal canal.
2. The squamous part of the occipital bone shows the 
following features:
(a) Internal occipital crest: It is a vertical bony ridge, 
running downward from the internal occipital 
protuberance to the foramen magnum.
(b) Internal occipital protuberance: It is located opposite 
to the external occipital protuberance.
(c) Grooves for the transverse and sigmoid sinuses: The 
grooves for the transverse sinus, one on either side, 
run laterally from the internal occipital protuberance 
to the mastoid angle of the parietal bone where it 
becomes continuous with the groove for the sigmoid 
sinus which ends into the posterior part of the 
jugular foramen.
(d) Cerebella fossa on each side lies between the 
transverse and sigmoid grooves and the foramen 
magnum.
(e) Fossae for occipital lobes one on each side lie above 
the groove for the transverse sinus.
Cavernous sinus
Greater petrosal nerve
Pterygoid
venous plexus
Emissary vein
Pterygoid canal
Nerve of
pterygoid canal
Sphenoid bone
Internal carotid artery with
sympathetic plexus around it
Deep petrosal
nerve
Petrous
temporal bone
Carotid canal
Meningeal branch
of ascending
pharyngeal artery
Fig. 21.7 Structures passing through the foramen lacerum.
--- Page 336 ---
Cranial Cavity
3. The posterior surface of the petrous bone presents the 
following features:
(a) Internal acoustic (auditory) meatus: It is a bony canal 
in the center of the posterior surface, lying almost 
directly medial to the external acoustic meatus. The 
meatus is about 1 cm in length.
(b) Subarcuate fossa, an indistinct depression lateral and 
superior to the internal acoustic meatus. It contains 
dural fold and some blood vessels.
(c) Aqueduct of vestibule, a slit behind the internal 
acoustic meatus. It transmits the endolymphatic 
duct of the internal ear.
(d) Cochlear canaliculus, a notch in the lower border of 
the posterior surface of the petrous bone, just above 
the anterior end of the jugular foramen. It lodges 
the cochlear canal.
N.B. The posterior surface of the petrous temporal bone is 
triangular and has three borders: superior, inferior, and 
posterior. Each border is related to a dural venous sinus: the 
superior border to the superior petrosal sinus, the inferior 
border to the inferior petrosal sinus, and the posterior border 
to the sigmoid sinus.
Structures Passing Through Various Foramina and 
Canals in the Posterior Cranial Fossa
Internal auditory meatus
1. Seventh cranial (facial) nerve.
2. Eighth cranial (vestibulo-cochlear) nerve.
3. Nervus intermedius.
4. Internal auditory (labyrinthine) vessels.
Jugular foramen (Fig. 21.8)
It may be divided into three parts: anterior, middle, and 
posterior.
1. Anterior part: Inferior petrosal sinus.
2. Middle part: In the anteroposterior direction.
(a) Ninth cranial (glossopharyngeal) nerve.
(b) Tenth cranial (vagus) nerve.
(c) Eleventh cranial (accessory) nerve.
 
The tenth and eleventh cranial nerves are surrounded in 
a common sheath of the dura mater, whereas the 9th 
cranial nerve has an independent sheath of the dura 
mater.
3. Posterior part: Sigmoid sinus.
Hypoglossal (anterior condylar) canal
1. Twelfth cranial (hypoglossal) nerve.
2. Meningeal branch of the ascending pharyngeal artery.
Posterior condylar canal (only sometimes present in the 
lower part of the sigmoid groove)
1. Emissary vein: connecting the suboccipital venous 
plexus to the sigmoid sinus.
2. Meningeal branch of the occipital artery.
Foramen magnum (Fig. 21.9)
It is divided into small anterior and large posterior compart-
ments by means of alar ligaments of axis vertebra:
1. Anterior compartment:
(a) Apical ligament of dens.
(b) Upper longitudinal band of the cruciform ligament 
of atlas.
(c) Membrana tectoria: a continuation of the posterior 
longitudinal ligament of the vertebral bodies.
2. Posterior compartment:
(a) Medulla oblongata: along with its meninges, i.e., 
dura mater, arachnoid mater, and pia mater.
(b) Two posterior spinal arteries (right and left).
(c) Anterior spinal artery.
(d) Communicating 
veins 
between 
internal 
vertebral venous plexus and the basilar venous 
plexus.
(e) Two vertebral arteries (right and left).
(f) Sympathetic plexus around the vertebral arteries: 
this plexus consists of postganglionic sympathetic 
fibres derived from the inferior cervical sympathetic 
ganglion.
(g) Spinal roots of two accessory nerves (right and 
left).
Fig. 21.8 Structures passing through the jugular foramen.
Sigmoid sinus
Accessory (XI) nerve
Vagus (X) nerve
Glossopharyngeal (IX) nerve
Inferior petrosal sinus
Fig. 21.9 Structures passing through the foramen magnum.
Posterior
compartment
Anterior
compartment
Apical ligament of
dens
Upper longitudinal bond of
cruciform ligament
Membrana tectoria
Anterior spinal artery
Posterior spinal artery
Spinal root of accessory nerve
Vertebral artery
Medulla oblongata (lower part)
--- Page 337 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
N.B. Tonsils of cerebellum project on each side of the 
medulla oblongata into the large posterior part of the 
foramen magnum.
The hemorrhage in the posterior cranial fossa does not 
become evident at once, unless the basilar part of the 
occipital bone is fractured and the mucous membrane of the 
pharyngeal roof is torn.
Clinical correlation
CRANIAL CAVITY AND MENINGES
The interior of the cranial cavity is lined by the dura mater 
and the surface of brain is covered by the pia mater. Between 
these two lies the arachnoid mater. These three membranes 
together constitute the meninges of the brain.
The arachnoid mater is connected to the pia mater by 
many fine filamentous processes. These two membranes are 
held together and closely associated with the brain, and 
therefore, discussed with the brain.
DURA MATER
The cerebral dura mater (also called cranial dura) is a strong 
fibrous membrane consisting of two layers: outer endosteal 
and inner meningeal layers. The two layers are fused with 
each other except where they enclose venous sinuses 
(Fig. 21.10).
Outer Layer (or Endosteal Layer)
The outer layer is really the periosteum lining the inner 
surfaces of the skull bones and is commonly referred to as 
endocranium. It presents the following features:
1. It is continuous with the periosteum (pericranium) on 
the outer surface of the skull through sutures and the 
foramina of the skull. It is also continuous with the 
periosteal lining (periorbita) of the orbit through 
superior orbital fissure.
2. It provides sheaths for cranial nerves, which fuse with 
epineurium. The dural sheath around the optic nerve 
fuses with the sclera of the eyeball.
3. It is loosely attached to the inner surface of the vault of 
the skull by numerous fibrous and vascular processes; 
however, it is firmly attached to the base of the skull 
along the sutures and around the margin of the foramen 
magnum. As a result, it is easily stripped from the vault 
of the skull but not from the base of the skull.
4. Meningeal vessels pass through this layer to supply the 
bone.
Inner Layer (or Meningeal Layer)
The inner layer is really the dura mater proper. It encloses the 
brain and at the foramen magnum becomes continuous with 
the dura mater surrounding the spinal cord (i.e., spinal 
dura). It is separated from the arachnoid mater by a subdural 
space.
At places, the meningeal layer is folded on itself to form 
dural folds (also called dural septa). The dural folds 
project into the cranial cavity and divide it into 
compartments which lodge the different parts of the brain 
(Fig. 21.11).
Folds of the Dura Mater
The folds of the dura mater are as follows:
1. Falx cerebri.
2. Tentorium cerebelli.
3. Falx cerebelli.
4. Diaphragma sellae.
Fig. 21.10 Cranial and spinal dura.
Brain
Meningeal layer
Endosteal layer
Skull
Spinal cord
Conus medullaris
Filum terminale
S2 vertebra
Spinal dura
of dura mater
(cranial dura)
--- Page 338 ---
Cranial Cavity
Falx cerebri (Fig. 21.12)
1. It is a large sickle-shaped fold of the dura mater 
occupying the median longitudinal fissure between the 
two cerebral hemispheres.
2. Its narrow anterior end is attached to the crista galli and 
the broad posterior end on to the upper surface of the 
tentorium cerebelli along the median plane.
3. Its convex upper margin is attached to the lips of the 
sagittal sulcus of the skull vault and its lower concave 
margin is free and lies just above the corpus callosum.
Venous sinuses enclosed in the falx cerebri (Fig. 21.12)
1. Superior sagittal sinus is enclosed within the convex 
upper border.
2. Inferior sagittal sinus is enclosed within the lower con-
cave margin.
3. Straight sinus lies along the line of attachment of the falx 
cerebri with the tentorium cerebelli.
Tentorium cerebelli (Fig. 21.13)
It is a tent-shaped fold of the dura mater forming the roof of 
the posterior cranial fossa. It separates the cerebellum from 
the occipital lobes of the cerebrum. It has two margins and 
two surfaces.
Margins
1. The inner free margin is U-shaped and encloses the 
tentorial notch (incisure) for the passage of the midbrain. 
The anterior ends of the concave free margin are 
attached to the anterior clinoid processes.
2. The outer attached margin is convex and attached on 
each side (from before backward) to the posterior 
clinoid process, the posteroinferior angle of the parietal 
bone, and the lips of transverse sulci on the occipital 
bone.
The free and attached margins cross each other near the apex 
of the petrous temporal bone to enclose a triangular area 
anteriorly which is pierced by the oculomotor nerve.
Surfaces
1. The convex upper surface slopes to either side from the 
median plane. In the median plane, it provides 
attachment to falx cerebri.
2. The concave inferior surface provides attachment to 
falx cerebelli in its posterior part.
N.B. Trigeminal or Meckel’s cave (Fig. 21.14): It is a recess 
of the dura mater present in relation to the attached outer 
margin of the tentorium cerebelli.
It is formed by the evagination of the meningeal layer of 
the dura mater by two roots of the trigeminal nerve below the 
Fig. 21.11 Coronal section through the posterior cranial 
fossa showing dural folds and dural venous sinuses enclosed 
in them: A, section through the anterior part; B, section 
through the middle part; C, section through the posterior 
part.
Superior sagittal sinus
Falx cerebri
Inferior
sagittal
sinus
Tentorium
cerebelli
Transverse
sinus
Tentorial notch
Superior sagittal sinus
Falx cerebri
Straight sinus
Falx cerebelli
Occipital sinus
Tentorium
cerebelli
Transverse
sinus
Superior sagittal 
sinus
Falx cerebri
Straight sinus
Transverse
sinus
Falx
cerebelli
Tentorium
cerebelli
Occipital sinus
--- Page 340 ---
Cranial Cavity
Venous sinus enclosed in the falx cerebri: Occipital sinus,
along with its posterior attached part.
Diaphragma sellae
It is a small circular horizontal fold of the inner layer of the 
dura mater forming the roof of the hypophyseal fossa.
It is attached anteriorly to the tuberculum sellae and 
posteriorly to the dorsum sellae and becomes continuous on 
each side with the dura mater of the middle cranial fossa.
It has a central aperture which provides passage to the 
stalk of the pituitary gland.
Blood Supply of the Dura Mater
Inner layer: The inner layer of the dura mater is more fibrous 
and requires very little blood to nourish it.
Outer layer: The outer layer of the dura mater is richly 
vascular and provides nourishment to the adjacent bone.
In the supratentorial compartment, it is supplied by the 
following arteries:
1. In the anterior cranial fossa: by the meningeal branches 
of the ophthalmic, anterior, and posterior ethmoidal 
arteries, and a branch of the middle meningeal artery.
2. In the middle cranial fossa: by the middle and accessory 
meningeal arteries and by the meningeal branches of the 
internal carotid and ascending pharyngeal arteries.
3. In the posterior cranial fossa: by the meningeal branches 
of the vertebral and occipital arteries.
The meningeal arteries are the chief source of blood supply 
to the bones of the skull. The bones receive very little blood 
from the vessels of the scalp. As a result, scalping does not 
produce necrosis of the underlying bone. The skull bones 
receive blood supply from exterior only where they provide 
attachment to muscles, viz. the temporal fossa and the 
suboccipital region.
Clinical correlation
Nerve Supply of the Dura Mater
Supratentorial dura is supplied by the ophthalmic nerve.
Infratentorial dura (dura of the floor) has rich sensory 
innervation (hence very sensitive to pain). It is supplied by 
the following nerves:
1. In the anterior cranial fossa: by the anterior and 
posterior ethmoidal nerves (and receives some twigs 
from the maxillary nerve).
2. In the middle cranial fossa: by the meningeal branch of 
the maxillary nerve (in the anterior part) and the 
meningeal branch of the mandibular nerve (nervus 
spinosus) in the posterior part.
3. In the posterior cranial fossa: by the meningeal branches 
of the vagus and hypoglossal nerves. These are the C1 
and C2 fibres carried by the cranial nerves. The dura 
mater around the foramen magnum is directly supplied 
by the C2 and C3 cervical nerves.
INTRACRANIAL DURAL VENOUS SINUSES
These are the various venous channels present in the cranial 
dura. They are formed in the following two ways:
1. By the separation of two layers of cranial dura.
2. By the reduplication of the meningeal layer.
All the venous sinuses, except the inferior sagittal and 
straight sinuses, lie between the meningeal and endosteal 
layers of the dura mater (Fig. 21.15). The sinuses have thin 
walls and are lined by endothelium which is continuous 
with that of veins. They drain blood from the brain and 
skull bones. The blood from dural venous sinuses is 
ultimately drained into internal jugular veins. Several of the 
sinuses communicate with the veins outside the skull, 
through emissary veins. The characteristic features of dural 
venous sinuses are as follows:
Features
1. Lie between the layers of the dura mater.
2. Have no muscle in their walls.
3. Lined by endothelium only (muscular coat is absent).
4. Are devoid of values in their lumen.
5. Receive venous blood and CSF.
6. Receive valveless emissary veins which regulate the blood 
flow and maintain the equilibrium of venous pressure 
within and outside the skull.
Classification
There are about 21 sinuses. They are classified into two types: 
paired and unpaired (Table 21.1).
Table 21.1 Classification of the dural venous sinuses (seven 
paired and seven unpaired)
Unpaired sinuses
Paired sinuses
1. Superior sagittal
1. Cavernous
2. Inferior sagittal
2. Superior petrosal
3. Straight
3. Inferior petrosal
4. Occipital
4. Transverse
5. Anterior intercavernous
5. Sigmoid
6. Posterior intercavernous
6. Sphenoparietal
7. Basilar venous plexus
7. Petrosquamous
N.B.
• The middle meningeal veins are often termed middle 
meningeal sinuses.
• The sigmoid and transverse sinuses together are often 
termed lateral sinus by the clinicians.
--- Page 341 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
CAVERNOUS SINUS (Fig. 21.16)
Location
The cavernous sinus (2 cm long, 1 cm wide) is a large venous 
space situated on either side of the body of the sphenoid and 
sella turcica in the middle cranial fossa. Its interior is divided 
into a number of small spaces (caverns) by trabeculae, hence 
the name cavernous sinus. The floor of the sinus is formed 
by the endosteal layer, while the lateral wall, roof, and medial 
wall by the meningeal layer. Medially, the roof is continuous 
with the diaphragm sellae. Posteriorly, the roof has a 
triangular depression between the attached margin (edge) of 
tentorium cerebelli to the posterior clinoid process and ridge 
raised by the free margin (edge) of tentorium cerebelli as it 
extends forward to gain attachment on the anterior clinoid 
process. The oculomotor and trochlear nerves pierce this 
triangle to enter the cavernous sinus.
Extent
Each sinus extends:
Anteriorly, up to the medial end of superior orbital fissure 
and posteriorly, up to apex to the petrous temporal bone.
Superficial middle
cerebral veins
Superior anastomotic vein
(of Trolard)
Superior sagittal sinus
Inferior sagittal sinus
Internal cerebral vein
Great cerebral vein
Confluence of sinuses
Inferior anastomotic vein
(of Labbe)
Transverse sinus
Inferior petrosal
sinus
Superior petrosal
sinus
Cavernous sinus
Sphenoparietal
sinuses
Straight sinus
Occipital sinus
Sigmoid sinus
Internal jugular vein
Fig. 21.15 Intracranial dural venous sinuses and their connections (lateral view).
Optic chiasma
Internal carotid artery
Endothelial lining
Oculomotor
Trochlear
Ophthalmic
Maxillary
Nerves
Mandibular
nerve
Abducent
nerve
Internal carotid
artery
Sphenoidal
air sinuses
Endosteal layer of
dura mater
CAVERNOUS SINUS
Meningeal layer of
dura mater
Hypophysis cerebri
Stalk of hypophysis cerebri
Fig. 21.16 Coronal section through the middle cranial fossa showing relations and contents of cavernous sinuses.
--- Page 342 ---
Cranial Cavity
Relations
Superior
1. Optic chiasma.
2. Optic tract.
3. Internal carotid artery.
4. Anterior perforated substance.
Inferior
1. Foramen lacerum.
2. Junction of the body and the greater wing of the 
sphenoid.
Medial
1. Pituitary gland (hypophysis cerebri).
2. Sphenoid air sinus.
Lateral
1. Temporal lobe (uncus) of the cerebral hemisphere.
2. Cavum trigeminale containing the trigeminal ganglion.
Anterior
1. Superior orbital fissure.
2. Apex of the orbit.
Posterior
1. Crus cerebri of midbrain.
2. Apex of the petrous temporal bone.
Structures Present in the Lateral Wall of the Sinus
From above downward these are as follows:
1. Oculomotor nerve.
2. Trochlear nerve.
3. Ophthalmic nerve.
4. Maxillary nerve.
Structures Passing Through Cavernous Sinus
1. Internal carotid artery surrounded by the sympathetic 
plexus of nerves.
2. Abducent nerve (it enters the sinus by passing below the 
petrosphenoid ligament and accompanies the artery on 
its inferolateral aspect).
It is believed that the pulsations of the internal carotid artery 
help in expelling blood from the sinus.
Tributaries of the Cavernous Sinus (Fig. 21.17)
The cavernous sinus receives blood from three sources: orbit, 
meninges, and brain. Hence, its tributaries come from these 
sources as follows:
From orbit
1. Superior ophthalmic vein.
2. Inferior ophthalmic vein.
3. Central vein of retina (sometimes).
From meninges
1. Sphenoparietal sinus.
2. Anterior (frontal) trunk of the middle meningeal vein.
From brain
1. Superficial middle cerebral vein.
2. Inferior cerebral veins (only few).
Communications of Cavernous Sinus (Fig. 21.17)
The cavernous sinus communicates with the:
1. Transverse sinus via superior petrosal sinus.
2. Internal jugular vein via inferior petrosal sinus.
3. Pterygoid venous plexus via emissary veins which pass 
through foramen ovale, foramen lacerum, and emissary 
sphenoidal foramen.
4. Facial vein via two routes:
(a) Superior ophthalmic vein → angular vein → facial 
vein
(b) Emissary veins → pterygoid venous plexus → deep 
facial vein → facial vein.
5. Opposite cavernous sinuses via anterior and posterior 
intercavernous sinuses.
6. Superior sagittal sinus via superficial middle cerebral 
vein and superior anastomotic vein.
Internal vertebral venous plexus, via basilar venous plexus.
Fig. 21.17 Tributaries and communications of cavernous 
sinus (superior view) (A = anterior intercavernous sinus, 
P = posterior intercavernous sinus, E = emissary vein).
Sphenoparietal
sinus
Inferior cerebral
veins
Superficial middle
cerebral vein
Jugular foramen
Inferior petrosal
sinus
Cavernous sinus
Inferior ophthalmic
vein
Basilar venous
plexus
Superior petrosal
sinus
Sigmoid
sinus
Foramen
magnum
Transverse
sinus
Straight
sinus
Superior
sagittal sinus
Superior
ophthalmic vein
Central vein
of retina
--- Page 343 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
• Cavernous sinus thrombosis: The septic thrombosis of 
cavernous sinus may be caused by its numerous 
communications. The commonest cause of thrombosis is 
the passage of septic emboli from the dangerous area of 
the face the through facial vein—deep facial vein—
pterygoid venous plexus—emissary vein.
Cavernous sinus thrombosis gives rise to the following 
signs and symptoms:
– Severe pain in the eye and forehead, due to involvement 
of the ophthalmic nerve.
– Ophthalmoplegia (paralysis of ocular muscles) due to 
involvement of the 3rd, 4th, and 6th cranial nerves.
– Marked edema of eyelids with exophthalmos, due to 
congestion of orbital veins following obstruction of 
ophthalmic veins.
• Arteriovenous communication: If the internal carotid 
artery is ruptured in the fracture base of the skull, an 
arteriovenous 
communication/fistula 
established 
between the artery and cavernous sinus. Consequently, 
arterial blood rushes into the cavernous sinus, enlarging it 
and forcing blood into the connecting veins.
Arteriovenous communication gives rise to the following 
signs and symptoms:
1. Pulsating exophthalmos; the eyeball protrudes and 
pulsates with each heartbeat.
2. A loud bruit (loud systolic murmur) is easily heard over 
the eye.
3. Ophthalmoplegia due to involvement of the 3rd, 4th, and 
6th cranial nerves.
4. Marked orbital and conjunctival edema due to raised 
venous pressure in the cavernous sinus.
Clinical correlation
SUPERIOR SAGITTAL SINUS
It lies between the two layers of the falx cerebri along the 
convexity of its attached border (Fig. 21.18).
It begins at the crista galli behind the foramen cecum, 
passes backward (lodges itself in a sagittal groove on the 
vault of the skull) and on reaching the internal occipital 
protuberance, it deviates usually to the right to become 
continuous with the right transverse sinus which in turn 
becomes continuous with the right sigmoid sinus. The 
right sigmoid sinus leaves the skull through the jugular 
foramen to continue as the right internal jugular vein. The 
size of sinus becomes progressively larger as it passes 
backward from the crista galli to the internal occipital 
protuberance.
Features
1. Is triangular in cross section.
2. Communicates with venous lacunae on each side; the 
sites of drainage of diploic and meningeal veins.
3. Arachnoid granulations project into its lumen (and 
those of venous lacunae).
Tributaries
1. Superior cerebral veins.
2. Parietal emissary veins.
3. Small vein from the nasal cavity (if foramen cecum is 
patent).
4. Veins of the frontal air sinus.
Diploic vein
Emissary vein
Superior sagittal sinus
Arachnoid granulation
Lacuna of superior
sagittal sinus
Subdural
space
Superior
cerebral vein
Perivascular space
(Virchow–Robin’s space)
around central branch
of cerebral artery
Falx cerebri
Subarachnoid space
Pia mater
Arachnoid
mater
Fig. 21.18 Schematic coronal section through the superior sagittal sinus showing arachnoid granulations and absorption of 
the cerebrospinal fluid.
--- Page 344 ---
Cranial Cavity
Thrombosis of superior sagittal sinus: The spread of 
infection from dangerous area of the face, scalp, and diploë 
to the superior sagittal sinus may cause its thrombosis.
The presenting clinical features of thrombosis are:
(a) marked increase in intracranial pressure, due to 
defective adsorption of CSF, and
(b) delirium, due to congestion of superior cerebral veins.
Clinical correlation
INFERIOR SAGITTAL SINUS
It is a small venous channel present between the two layers 
of the lower free margin of the falx cerebri. It ends by 
joining the great cerebral vein to form straight sinus. It 
drains the lower part of the medial surface of each cerebral 
hemisphere.
STRAIGHT SINUS
It lies in the median plane within the junction of falx cerebri 
and tentorium cerebelli.
It begins as a continuation of the inferior sagittal sinus 
and terminates usually into the left transverse sinus which at 
the mastoid angle of the parietal bone becomes continuous 
with the left sigmoid sinus.
TRANSVERSE SINUS
It begins at the internal occipital protuberance and runs 
laterally between the two layers of the attached margin of the 
tentorium cerebelli. It courses horizontally grooving the 
occipital bone and mastoid angle of the parietal bone and 
becomes continuous as the sigmoid sinus. The right 
transverse sinus is larger than the left transverse sinus 
because the right sinus is the continuation of the larger 
superior sagittal sinus and the left sinus is the continuation 
of the smaller straight sinus.
SIGMOID SINUS
Each sigmoid sinus is a direct continuation of the transverse 
sinus. It is sigmoid or S-shaped, hence its name. In its course, 
it deeply grooves the inner surface of the mastoid part of the 
petrous bone. Its terminal part curves downward and then 
forward to the posterior margin of the jugular foramen 
through which it passes to continue as the internal jugular 
vein.
Its tributaries are:
1. Mastoid and condylar emissary veins.
2. Cerebellar veins.
3. Internal auditory vein.
Thrombosis of sigmoid sinus: The sigmoid sinus is 
separated from the mastoid antrum and mastoid air cells 
only by a thin plate of the bone. The thrombosis of the 
sigmoid sinus is, therefore, secondary to infection of the 
middle ear or mastoid process. Further, utmost care should 
be taken not to expose sigmoid sinus during operations on 
the mastoid process.
Clinical correlation
OCCIPITAL SINUS
It lies between the two layers of the attached margin of falx 
cerebelli. The occipital sinus runs downward from the 
internal occipital protuberance to the posterior margin of 
the foramen magnum where it skirts the margin of the 
foramen and drains into the sigmoid sinuses.
BASILAR VENOUS PLEXUS
It consists of network of veins lying between the two layers 
of dura on the clivus. It connects the two inferior petrosal 
sinuses and communicates with the internal vertebral 
venous plexus. It receives blood from the pons and medulla. 
Thrombosis of the basilar venous plexus is, therefore, usu-
ally fatal.
N.B. 
Confluence of sinuses (torcular herophili): It is the region 
where the superior sagittal and straight sinuses end and the 
right and left transverse sinuses begin. The occipital sinus 
also drains into the confluence. The confluence of sinuses is 
situated near the internal occipital protuberance.
SPHENOPARIETAL SINUS
The sphenoparietal sinus lies along the posterior free 
margin of the lesser wing of the sphenoid and drains into 
the anterior part of the cavernous sinus.
SUPERIOR PETROSAL SINUS
This sinus lies in the anterior part of the attached margin of 
tentorium cerebelli and crosses above the trigeminal nerve.
INFERIOR PETROSAL SINUS
This sinus lies in the petro-occipital suture.
Middle meningeal veins, one on each side, form two 
trunks: frontal and parietal. The two trunks follow the 
corresponding divisions of the middle meningeal artery 
nearer to the bone, hence more liable to injury in skull 
fracture. The frontal trunk usually drains into the cavernous 
sinus and the parietal trunk into the pterygoid venous plexus 
by passing through the foramen spinosum.
--- Page 345 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
PETROSQUAMOUS SINUS
This sinus lies in the petrosquamous suture if present and 
drains into the transverse sinus.
ANTERIOR AND POSTERIOR 
INTERCAVERNOUS SINUSES
The anterior and posterior intercavernous sinuses connect 
the cavernous sinuses. They pass through diaphragma sellae 
in front and behind the opening for infundibulum of the 
pituitary gland, respectively. Intercavernous sinuses and 
cavernous sinuses together form the circular sinus.
PITUITARY GLAND
The pituitary gland (hypophysis cerebri) has been described 
in detail in General Anatomy (pages 198–201), by Vishram 
Singh. The following text deals with the surgical anatomy 
of the gland.
Location (Fig. 21.19)
The pituitary gland is a small endocrine gland situated in the 
hypophyseal fossa on the superior surface of the body of the 
sphenoid (sella turcica). It is suspended from the floor of 
the 3rd ventricle of the brain by a narrow stalk called 
infundibulum. The gland is enclosed in the dural sheath, 
whose tense upper wall—the diaphragma sellae—is perforated 
by the infundibulum or stalk. On each side, the pituitary gland 
is related to the cavernous sinus and in front and behind to the 
anterior and posterior intercavernous sinuses.
Shape and Measurements
The gland is oval in shape and measures 8 mm anteroposte-
riorly, 12 mm transversely, and weighs about 500 mg.
Relations
Superior: Optic chiasma with diaphragma sella intervening
Inferior: Sphenoidal air sinuses with thin bony plate of the 
hypophyseal fossa intervening.
Lateral: 
Cavernous sinus on each side.
Subdivisions (Fig. 21.20)
The gland has two main subdivisions: adenohypophysis and 
neurohypophysis, 
which 
differ 
from 
each 
other 
embryologically, morphologically, and functionally (Table 
21.2). The adenohypophysis develops as a diverticulum 
(Rathke’s pouch) from the ectodermal roof of the 
stomodeum. Normally the communication with the roof of 
the pharynx disappears completely owing to the rapid 
growth of the sphenoid. Occasionally, however, it may persist 
as a craniopharyngeal canal. The uppermost part of the 
original diverticulum remains as a cleft which separates the 
Fig. 21.19 Location of hypophysis cerebri (pituitary gland).
Fig. 21.20 Parts of hypophysis cerebri as seen in sagittal 
section.
Meningeal
layer
Infundibulum
Diaphragma sellae
Endosteal
layer
of dura mater 
Hypophyseal fossa
Pituitary gland
Sphenoidal air
sinus
ventricle
Hypothalamus
Mamillary
body
Posterior pituitary
(neurohypophysis)
Optic chiasma
Intraglandular
cleft
Pars tuberalis
Pars intermedia
Pars distalis
Anterior pituitary
(Adenohypophysis)
Infundibulum
Table 21.2 Hormones secreted by different parts of adeno 
hypophysis
Part
Cell types/nuclei
Hormones secreted
Pars 
anterior
Acidophil cells
Growth hormone
II. Prolactin
Basophil cells
Adrenocorticotrophic 
hormone
II. Thyrotrophic hormone
III. Gonadotrophic 
hormone
Pars 
intermedia
Melanocyte stimulating 
hormone
Pars 
posterior
Supraoptic nucleus 
of hypothalamus 
Paraventricular 
nucleus of 
hypothalamus
Vasopressin or antidiuretic 
hormone
Oxytocin
--- Page 346 ---
Cranial Cavity
pars anterior and pars intermedia. The neurohypophysis
develops as a downgrowth from the floor of the diencephalon.
Adenohypophysis consists of:
(a) pars anterior,
(b) pars intermedius, and
(c) pars tuberalis.
Neurohypophysis consists of:
(a) pars posterior, and
(b) infundibulum.
Functional Connections with Hypothalamus
Hypothalamohypophysial Tract
It consists of nerve fibres arising from the supraoptic and 
para ventricular nuclei of the hypothalamus and projecting 
into the posterior lobe of the pituitary gland. The vasopressin 
and ADH produced in supraoptic and paraventricular nuclei 
are transported by the nerve fibres of the tract, and stored in 
the nerve terminals (Herring bodies) of these fibres in the 
posterior lobe (neurohypophysis). Then hormones are 
released in the venous sinusoids as and when necessary.
Hypothalamohypophysial Portal System
It consists of two sets of capillaries—one in the hypothalamus 
(median eminence) and the other in the hypophysis cerebri 
(sinusoids of pars anterior). The neurons of the hypothalamus 
produce hormones-releasing factors in the capillaries of the 
median eminence and upper part of the infundibulum. These 
are carried by the portal system to pars anterior where they 
stimulate it to release appropriate hormones.
Arterial Supply
The following branches of internal carotid artery supply the 
pituitary gland:
Fig. 21.21 Bitemporal hemianopia (T = temporal field of 
vision, N = nasal field of vision).
1. Superior hypophyseal artery, one on each side.
2. Inferior hypophyseal artery, one on each side.
Venous Drainage
Short veins from the pituitary gland drain into neighboring 
dural venous sinuses (e.g., cavernous and intercavernous 
sinuses). The hormones pass out of the gland through 
venous blood to the target sites.
• Craniopharyngioma: The remnants of Rathke’s pouch 
may give rise to a tumor inside the sphenoid bone called 
craniopharyngioma.
Sometimes some cells of Rathke’s pouch extend 
backward along the roof of the nasopharynx and form an 
accessory lobe of the anterior lobe in the pharyngeal wall 
called pharyngeal hypophysis.
• Pituitary tumors: The pituitary tumors occur commonly. 
The commonest tumor of the pituitary gland is adenoma 
arising from its chromophobe cells. Pituitary adenoma 
produces two types of symptoms: (a) symptoms due to 
pressure on adjacent structures, and (b) symptoms due to 
endocrine disturbances.
Symptoms due to pressure on adjacent structures:
– Enlargement of hypophyseal fossa due to downward 
growth (intrasellar growth) of an adenoma. It is seen as 
ballooning of hypophyseal fossa (sella turcica) in plane 
radiograph of skull (lateral view).
– Bitemporal hemianopia (loss of vision in right and left 
temporal fields of vision) due to the upward growth of 
adenoma pressing the central part of the optic chiasma 
(Fig. 21.21).
– Exophthalmos and ophthalmoplegia due to pressure on 
the cavernous sinus.
Symptoms due to endocrine disturbances:
– Gigantism before puberty and acromegaly in adults, due 
to excessive secretion of growth (GH) hormone.
– Cushing syndrome due to excessive secretion ACTH.
– Dwarfism due to hyposecretion of GH in infants and 
children due to involvement of the posterior lobe.
– Diabetes insipidus due to involvement of the posterior 
lobe.
Surgical approaches for removal of pituitary adenoma: The 
pituitary tumors may be removed by the transfrontal 
operation or by the trans-sphenoidal route.
Trans-sphenoidal approach: In this approach, the surgeon 
enters the pituitary fossa from below through a sphenoidal air 
sinus, either via ethmoidal cells after raising the periosteum 
from 
medial 
wall 
orbit 
(actually 
should 
termed 
transorbital–transethmoidal–
trans-sphenoidal approach) or by elevating the nasal mucosa 
from the nasal septum and removing the nasal septum (note 
that nasal cavity itself is not entered) and rostrum of the 
sphenoid (transnasal-trans-sphenoidal approach).
Transfrontal (subfrontal) approach: In this, the gland is 
approached through the anterior cranial fossa by elevating 
the frontal lobe of the brain.
Clinical correlation
Bitemporal hemianopia
Nasal fibres of
retina
Optic chiasma
Pituitary tumor
Compression of
central part of
optic chiasma
--- Page 347 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
Golden Facts to Remember
  Largest bony cavity in the body
Cranial cavity
  Deepest cranial fossa
Posterior
  Largest bony foramen in the body
Foramen magnum
  Most common site of fracture of the base of skull
Middle cranial fossa
  All the dural venous sinuses lie between the 
meningeal and endosteal layers of the dura 
mater except
Inferior sagittal and straight sinuses
  Longest dural venous sinus
Superior sagittal sinus
  Chief source of blood supply to the skull bone
Meningeal vessels
  Commonest tumors of the pituitary gland
Adenoma arising from its chromophobe cells
  Rathke’s pouch
Ectodermal diverticulum from roof of stomodeum 
giving rise to adenohypophysis
  Herring bodies
Nerve terminals of hypothalamo-hypophyseal tracts 
containing vasopressin and antidiuretic hormones
  Commonest cause of extradural hematoma
Tear of the anterior trunk of middle meningeal vein 
and anterior branch of middle meningeal artery
  Meckel’s cave
Pouch of the inner layer of the dura mater over 
trigeminal impression on the anterior surface of the 
petrous temporal bone containing the trigeminal 
ganglion
  Largest diploic vein
Occipital diploic vein
A 49-year-old man fell from the second floor terrace of 
his house. He became unconscious and there was bleeding 
from his head. He was immediately taken to the nearby 
hospital, where on examination, the doctors found that 
his occipital region was badly bruised. They also noticed 
bleeding from his right ear. On careful examination, it 
was noticed that his right eye was protruded and 
pulsating. The conjunctiva was engorged (chemosis). A 
CT scan revealed the fracture of the base of the skull in the 
region of middle cranial fossa.
Questions
1. What is the commonest site of fracture of the base 
of the skull? Mention the reason(s) for the same.
2. Why is fracture of middle cranial fossa often associ-
ated with bleeding from the ear?
3. What is the anatomical basis of pulsations in the 
right eye?
Answers
1. Middle cranial fossa; because the base of the skull 
in this region is weak due to the presence of a large 
number of foramina and canals.
2. In fracture of the middle cranial fossa, the roof of 
middle ear (tegmen tympani) is fractured and the 
tympanic membrane is torn, which results in 
bleeding from the ear.
3. If internal carotid artery within cavernous is torn 
in fracture, there occurs an arteriovenous fistula.
The blood from the artery due to high arterial 
pressure rushes into the cavernous sinus, forcing 
the blood of cavernous sinus into the ophthalmic 
veins. As a result, the eye protrudes (exophthalmos)
and the conjunctiva becomes engorged. The 
bulging eye pulsates (pulsating exophthalmos) in 
synchrony with the arterial pulse.
Clinical Case Study
--- Page 348 ---
Cranial Nerves
CHAPTER
There are 12 pairs of the cranial nerves, out of which the first 
two pairs arise from the forebrain and the next 10 pairs arise 
from the brainstem. They are numbered 1 to 12 in the 
craniocaudal sequence of their attachment on the brain. The 
cranial nerves are generally designated by Roman numerals.
The 12 pairs of nerves are:
Olfactory 
Facial
Optic 
VIII Vestibulo-cochlear
III Oculomotor 
Glossopharyngeal
IV Trochlear 
Vagus
Trigeminal 
Accessory
VI Abducent 
Hypoglossal
N.B.
• A minute bundle of nerve fibres closely related to the 
olfactory nerves is termed the 13th pair or ‘O’ pair of 
cranial nerves. Each nerve is attached to the cere brum, 
posterior to the olfactory stria of the olfactory tract close 
to anterior perforated substance and septal areas and 
distributed to the nasal mucous membrane. Its exact 
function is not known, but it is thought to provide a 
special chemo-sensory pathway of olfaction and affects 
the secretion of luteinizing hormone-releasing factor 
from the hypothalamus. In addition, it plays an important 
role in smell-mediated sex behavior.
Functional Components
A cranial nerve consists of motor fibres (motor nerve) or 
sensory fibres (sensory nerve) or both the motor and sensory 
fibres (mixed nerve).
The motor fibres of cranial nerves can be of the following 
three types:
1. Somatic efferent (SE) or general somatic efferent (GSE) 
fibres. They supply the striated muscles which develop 
from somites.
2. Special visceral efferent (SVE) fibres. They supply the 
muscles which develop from the mesoderm of pharyngeal 
arches.
General visceral efferent (GVE) fibres. They supply the 
glands, smooth muscles of viscera, and vessels. They are 
preganglionic parasympathetic fibres.
The sensory fibres of cranial nerves can be of the following 
four types:
General somatic afferent (GSA) fibres. They carry general 
sensations of pain, touch, and temperature from skin 
and proprioceptive sensations of vibration and muscle 
and joint sense.
General visceral afferent (GVA) fibres. They carry general 
sensations of distension and ischemic pain from viscera.
3. Special visceral afferent (SVA) fibres. They carry special 
sensations of taste from tongue.
In addition to the aforementioned three types, the sensory 
fibres may be special somatic afferent (SSA) which carry 
special sensations of smell, hearing, and balance.
N.B.
• The motor fibres of cranial nerves arise as outgrowths of 
axons from motor nuclei situated within the central 
nervous system (CNS).
• The sensory fibres arise as outgrowths of axons from cells 
situated within the sensory ganglia (situated outside the 
CNS) and terminate in the sensory nuclei situated within 
the CNS.
• The motor and sensory nuclei within the CNS are arranged 
in longitudinal columns called functional columns.
OLFACTORY NERVE
Olfactory nerve is the 1st cranial nerve. It is purely sensory 
and carries the sense of smell from nasal cavity (Fig. 22.1).
Unique Features
1. The primary sensory neurons of olfactory nerve lie on 
the body surface in the epithelial lining of the nasal 
cavity and their dendrites lie free in the mucous film.
--- Page 349 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
2. The primary sensory neurons of olfactory nerve 
(olfactory neurons) undergo continuous turnover, i.e., 
they are continuously replaced by stem cells in the 
olfactory neuroepithelium.
Functional Components
Special somatic afferent fibres: They carry special sensations 
of smell from the olfactory region of the nasal cavity and 
terminate in the olfactory bulb.
Course, Relations, and Distribution
Each olfactory nerve consists of about 20 minute bundles 
of non-myelinated nerve fibres. They arise from primary 
receptor neurons (modified bipolar neurons) of the 
olfactory epithelium of nasal cavity, pass through foramina 
in the cribriform plate of the ethmoid to enter the anterior 
cranial fossa, where they terminate in the olfactory bulb. In 
the olfactory bulb, they synapse with the mitral cells. The 
bundles of olfactory nerves are surrounded by three 
meninges (namely pia mater, arachnoid mater, and dura 
mater) near the cribriform plate. This provides a potential 
communication between the subarachnoid space and 
lymphatics of the nasal mucosa. Thus, infection from nose 
can spread into the meninges of the brain.
Distribution: olfactory region of the nasal cavity.
• Anosmia: The loss of sense of smell is called anosmia. 
Anosmia can occur for a number of reasons such as 
atrophic rhinitis (degenerative disorder of nasal mucosa), 
fracture of the anterior cranial fossa (ethmoidal fracture), 
etc. The ethmoidal fracture is often associated with blood-
stained cerebrospinal fluid (CSF rhinorrhea).
• Clinical testing of olfactory nerve: The olfactory nerve 
is tested clinically by asking the patient to smell common 
odors such as peppermint, garlic, or cloves from each 
side of his nostril separately with eyes closed.
Clinical correlation
OPTIC NERVE
Optic nerve is the 2nd cranial nerve. It is purely sensory and 
responsible for vision; hence, it is also called the nerve of 
sight.
Unique Features
The optic nerve is not a true peripheral (cranial) nerve. It is 
actually a tract of brain for it develops as an outgrowth of 
diencephalon during embryonic life. Hence, it presents the 
following unique features:
1. It consists of second-order sensory neurons.
2. Its fibres are myelinated by oligodendrocytes.
3. It is surrounded by meninges.
4. Its fibres cannot regenerate if cut/damaged.
Functional Component
Special somatic afferent fibres: They carry sense of sight from 
the visual field of the corresponding eye.
Course and Relations
The fibres of optic nerve arise from ganglion cells (second- 
order neurons) in the neural layer of the retina of the eyeball, 
converge toward the optic disc at the posterior pole of the 
eyeball, pierce the outer layer of retina, choroid, and sclera to 
leave the eyeball. Immediately after emerging from the 
eyeball, the fibres unite to form the optic nerve, which passes 
posteromedially through the posterior half of the orbit and 
enters the middle cranial fossa through the optic canal. In the 
middle cranial fossa, optic nerves of two sides unite to form 
the optic chiasma. The midregion of optic chiasma is 
composed of crossed fibres from the medial/nasal halves of 
the retina of both eyes, while the lateral region is made up of 
fibres from the lateral/temporal half of the retina of the 
ipsilateral eye.
Diverging from the chiasma are the optic tracts. Most of 
the fibres of the optic tract relay in the lateral geniculate body. 
The third-order neurons arise in the lateral geniculate body, 
run in the retrolenticular part of the internal capsule, and 
form optic radiations. The fibres of optic radiation terminate 
in and around the calcarine sulcus of the occipital lobe (vis-
ual cortex). Some of the fibres from the lateral geniculate 
body reach the pretectal area of the midbrain and form a part 
of the pathway for light reflex.
Thus, visual pathway consists of the following compo-
nents in craniocaudal order (Fig. 22.2):
Retina →optic nerve →optic tract →lateral geniculate 
body → optic radiation → visual cortex.
The optic nerve is 4 cm in length. It is divided into three 
parts: (a) intraorbital part, (b) canalicular part, and (c) intra-
cranial part. It is enclosed by three meninges of the brain. 
Fig. 22.1 Location of olfactory epithelium in the nasal 
cavity.
Sphenoidal
air sinus
Olfactory
mucous
membrane
Olfactory tract
Olfactory bulb
Olfactory nerves
Frontal
air sinus
--- Page 351 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
6th cranial nerve) and superior oblique (supplied by 4th 
cranial nerve), Mnemonic: A3, LR6S04. The GSE fibres 
arise from the somatic component of oculomotor 
nucleus (also called the somatic motor nucleus).
2. General visceral efferent fibres: They supply the 
sphincter pupillae and ciliaris muscles. They arise from 
the parasympathetic component of oculomotor nucleus
(also called the Edinger–Westphal nucleus). These are 
preganglionic parasympathetic fibres and relay in the 
ciliary ganglion. The postganglionic parasympathetic 
fibres arise from the ganglion and supply the sphincter 
pupillae and ciliaris muscles.
Course, Relations, and Distribution (Fig. 22.4)
The oculomotor nerve arises from the oculomotor sulcus on 
the medial aspect of the cerebral peduncle of the midbrain 
and appears in the interpeduncular fossa. It runs forward 
and laterally between the posterior cerebral and superior 
cerebellar arteries and lateral to the posterior communicating 
artery, passes through the tentorial notch of tentorium 
cerebelli to reach the middle cranial fossa. Here it pierces the 
dura mater in the oculomotor triangle lying in between the 
free and attached margins of tentorium cerebelli in the roof 
of the cavernous sinus and enters the lateral wall of the 
cavernous sinus where it lies superior to the trochlear, 
ophthalmic, and maxillary nerves, and lateral to the internal 
carotid artery. In the anterior part of the cavernous sinus, the 
nerve divides into upper and lower divisions. The two 
divisions enter the orbit through the superior orbital fissure 
within the common tendinous ring. The nasociliary nerve 
intervenes between the two divisions. The smaller upper 
division passes above the optic nerve on the inferior surface 
of superior rectus (which it supplies), and then passes 
through the superior rectus to supply the levator palpebrae 
superioris.
The larger interior division of the oculomotor nerve passes 
below the optic nerve and immediately gives three branches 
which supply the medial rectus, inferior rectus, and inferior 
oblique muscles. The nerve to inferior oblique gives motor 
root (parasympathetic root) to the ciliary ganglion located in 
the posterior part of the orbit. The postganglionic fibres 
from this ganglion run through short ciliary nerves and sup-
ply the sphincter pupillae and ciliaris muscles.
Lesions of oculomotor nerve: The damage of oculomotor 
nerve may occur due to the following factors:
(a) Compression by aneurysm of the posterior communi-
cating artery as it passes between posterior cerebral and 
superior cerebellar arteries.
(b) Compression by aneurysm of the internal carotid artery 
as it passes through the lateral wall of the cavernous 
sinus.
(c) Compression by transtentorial uncal herniation as it 
passes through the tentorial notch.
The damage of oculomotor nerve clinically presents as:
• Ptosis (drooping of the upper eyelid), due to paralysis of 
the levator palpebrae superioris.
• Lateral strabismus (i.e., lateral squint), due to paralysis of 
the medial rectus and consequent unopposed action of 
the lateral rectus muscle.
• Dilated and fi xed pupil, due to paralysis of the sphincter 
pupillae and consequent unopposed action of the dilator 
pupillae.
• Loss of accommodation, due to paralysis of the medial 
rectus, sphincter pupillae, and ciliaris muscles.
• Double vision or diplopia occurs on looking medially, 
inferiorly, and superiorly, due to paralysis of the medial 
rectus, inferior rectus, and inferior oblique muscles.
• Proptosis (prominence of the eyeball) due to relaxation of 
the muscles of the eyeball.
Clinical correlation
TROCHLEAR NERVE
Trochlear nerve is the 4th cranial nerve. It is purely motor 
and supplies only one muscle—the superior oblique muscle 
of the eyeball.
Fig. 22.4 Origin, course, and distribution of the oculomotor 
nerve.
Inferior oblique
Inferior rectus
Medial rectus
Orbit
Levator palpebrae superioris
Superior rectus
Ciliary ganglion
Lateral rectus
Upper division
Lower division
Cavernous sinus
Posterior
clinoid process
Posterior
cerebral artery
Superior
cerebellar artery
Oculomotor nucleus
Periaqueductal
grey matter
Red nucleus
Midbrain
Superior orbital
fissure
--- Page 352 ---
Cranial Nerves
Unique Features
1. It is the only cranial nerve which emerges on the dorsal 
aspect of the brain.
2. It is the most slender of all the cranial nerves.
3. It is the smallest cranial nerve.
4. It is the only cranial nerve whose nuclear fibres decussate 
before emerging on the surface of the brain.
5. Its nucleus receives only ipsilateral corticonuclear fibres.
6. Phylogenetically, it is the nerve of 3rd eye.
Functional Components and Nuclei
General somatic efferent fibres: They arise from the trochlear 
nucleus in the midbrain and supply the superior oblique 
muscle of the eyeball.
Course, Relations, and Distribution (Fig. 22.5)
The trochlear nerves arise from the dorsal aspect of the 
midbrain, one on either side of frenulum veli. After emerging 
from the brain, the nerve winds round the superior cerebellar 
peduncle and cerebral peduncle just above the pons. It then 
passes between the posterior cerebral and superior cerebellar 
arteries to appear ventrally. It lies medial to and below the 
free margin to tentorium cerebelli. The nerve enters the 
cavernous sinus by piercing the posterior corner of its roof. 
In the cavernous sinus, it runs forward in its lateral wall 
between the oculomotor and ophthalmic nerves. In the 
anterior part of the sinus, it crosses over the oculomotor 
nerve and becomes lateral to it. The nerve enters the orbit 
through the superior orbital fissure superolateral to the 
tendinous ring. It runs medially above the levator palpebrae 
superioris to enter the orbital surface of the superior oblique 
which it supplies.
Lesions of trochlear nerve: The injury of trochlear nerve 
will cause paralysis of the superior oblique muscle of the 
eyeball. This will clinically present as:
(a) extorsion of the eyeball and weakness of downward 
gaze. As a result, the patient faces difficulty while going 
downstairs or reading newspaper, and
(b) diplopia (double vision), which occurs when the patient 
looks laterally and in glances on looking downward. 
There is compensatory head-tilting to the opposite side.
Clinical correlation
ABDUCENT NERVE
Abducent nerve is the 6th cranial nerve. It is purely motor 
and supplies only one muscle—the lateral rectus of the eye-
ball. It is so named because it abducts the eye. It is also called 
lover’s nerve, because in ancient times (non-verbal era 
between the teenager girls and boys), the boy used to call the 
girls from a gathering by sending signal through the action of 
this muscle.
Unique Feature
It is most susceptible to damage of all the cranial nerves dur-
ing increased intracranial pressure.
Functional Components and Nuclei
1. General somatic efferent fibres. They arise from the 
abducent nucleus in the pons and supply the lateral 
rectus muscle of the eyeball.
2. General 
somatic 
afferent 
fibres. 
They 
carry 
proprioceptive sensations from the lateral rectus and 
terminate in the mesencephalic nucleus of the trigeminal 
nerve.
Course, Relations, and Distribution (Fig. 22.6)
The abducent nerve arises at the lower border of the pons 
opposite the pyramid of the medulla. The nerve runs upward, 
forward, and laterally dorsal to the anterior cerebellar artery 
and pierces the dura mater over the clivus inferolateral to the 
dorsum sellae. It then passes through the medial wall of the 
inferior petrosal sinus and arches forward directly over the 
sharp ridge of the petrous temporal bone, under the 
petroclinoid ligament and enters the fibro-osseous canal 
(Dorello’s canal) formed by the apex of the petrous temporal 
bone and petroclinoid ligament (Gruber’s ligament). The 
Fig. 22.5 Origin, course, and distribution of the trochlear 
nerve.
Superior oblique
Eyeball
Levator
palpebrae
superioris
Superior
orbital fissure
Posterior cerebral
artery
Superior cerebellar
artery
Trochlear nucleus
Periaqueductal
grey matter
Midbrain
Trochlear nerve
--- Page 353 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
TRIGEMINAL NERVE
Trigeminal nerve is the 5th cranial nerve. It is a mixed nerve 
containing both the motor and sensory fibres but 
predominantly it is sensory. It consists of three large nerves: 
ophthalmic, maxillary, and mandibular, hence the name 
trigeminal nerve (L. trigeminus = triplet). It is a motor nerve 
to the muscles of mastication and several small muscles and 
the principal sensory nerve of the head and face.
Unique Features
1. It is the largest cranial nerve.
Its sensory ganglion (largest in the body) is located within 
the cranial cavity (cf. all the sensory ganglia are located 
outside the cranial cavity).
Functional Components and Nuclei (Fig. 22.7)
1. Special visceral efferent fibres. They arise from motor 
the nucleus of the trigeminal nerve in the pons and supply 
the muscles derived from the 1st pharyngeal arch, viz.
the muscles of mastication, mylohyoid, anterior belly of 
digastric, tensor palati, and tensor tympani.
2. General somatic afferent fibres:
(a) They carry exteroceptive sensations (i.e., pain, touch, 
and temperature) from skin of head and face, 
mucous membrane of mouth, nasal cavity, 
meninges, etc. and terminate in the main sensory 
nucleus and spinal nucleus of the trigeminal nerve.
(b) They also carry proprioceptive sensations from the 
muscles of mastication, temporomandibular joint, 
and teeth and terminate in the mesencephalic 
nucleus of the trigeminal nerve and the reticular 
formation of brainstem.
The exteroceptive neurons are pseudounipolar and their cell 
bodies are located in the trigeminal ganglion.
The proprioceptive neurons are unipolar and their cell 
bodies are located in the mesencephalic nucleus of the 
trigeminal nerve.
The mesencephalic nucleus is the only site in the CNS which 
contains unipolar neurons/first-order sensory neurons.
Course, Relations, and Distribution
The trigeminal nerve arises by two roots (a smaller medial 
motor root and a larger lateral sensory root) from the 
ventrolateral aspect of the pons at its junction with the 
middle cerebellar peduncle (Fig. 22.8).
The sensory root passes forward and laterally over the 
apex of the petrous temporal bone to enter the middle 
cranial fossa. Here it exhibits a rounded enlargement, the 
trigeminal (gasserian) ganglion. The ganglion occupies a 
Lateral
rectus
Eyeball
Superior orbital
fissure
Cavernous sinus
Upper border of
petrous temporal
bone
Abducent nerve
Anterior inferior
cerebellar artery
Motor nucleus of 
facial nerve
Facial nerve
Abducent
nucleus
Facial colliculus
Pons
Internal carotid
artery
Fig. 22.6 Origin, course, and distribution of the abducent 
nerve.
nerve then enters the cavernous sinus by piercing the 
posterior wall close to the floor of the sinus. In the cavernous 
sinus, it runs forward inferolateral to the internal carotid 
artery.
The nerve enters the orbit through the superior orbital 
fissure within the tendinous ring lateral to two divisions of 
oculomotor and nasociliary nerves. In the orbit, it runs 
forward, toward the lateral side to enter the orbital surface 
of the lateral rectus muscle which it supplies.
Lesions of abducent nerve: The abducent nerve is generally 
damaged during increased intracranial pressure. During 
increased intracranial pressure, the nerve is stretched due to 
the descent of brainstem. Consequently, the nerve is cut by 
the sharp bony edge of the petrous temporal bone.
The paralysis of lateral rectus muscle following the injury 
to the abducent nerve leads to:
(a) convergent squint due to the unopposed action of 
medial rectus,
(b) inability to abduct the eye, and
(c) diplopia (double vision) with maximum separation of 
two images while looking toward the paralyzed side.
Clinical correlation
--- Page 354 ---
Cranial Nerves
Fig. 22.8 Roots and divisions of the trigeminal nerve 
(TG = trigeminal ganglion).
PONS
Petrous
temporal bone
Mandibular
division
Foramen ovale
Maxillary division
Foramen
rotundum
Ophthalmic
division
Motor
root
Sensory
root
Superior
orbital
fissure
Fig. 22.7 Functional components of the trigeminal nerve.
Mesencephalic
nucleus
Trigeminal
ganglion
Motor nucleus
Nuclei of 
trigeminal nerve
Main (chief)
sensory nucleus
Spinal nucleus
Special visceral efferent
fibres
GSA fibres for
proprioception
GSA fibres for touch
GSA fibres for pain
and temperature
dural invagination in a shallow fossa on the anterior surface 
of the petrous temporal bone.
The subarachnoid expansion over this portion of 
trigeminal nerve is called Meckel’s cave (Fig. 21.14). The 
sensory root may be cut here in order to relieve the pain of 
trigeminal neuralgia.
The convex distal surface of ganglion gives origin to three 
large divisions of the trigeminal nerve—ophthalmic, 
maxillary, and mandibular:
1. The ophthalmic nerve (purely sensory) arises from the 
anterolateral aspect of the ganglion and enters the lateral 
wall of the cavernous sinus where it lies below the trochlear 
nerve.
 
 In the cavernous sinus, it divides into three branches: 
nasociliary, lacrimal, and frontal. All these branches enter 
the orbit through the superior orbital fissure.
2. The maxillary nerve (purely sensory) arises from the 
ganglion and enters the lateral wall of the cavernous sinus 
where it occupies the lowest position and leaves the 
cavernous sinus to enter the pterygopalatine fossa
through the foramen rotundum.
3. The mandibular nerve (the largest division) arises 
from the trigeminal ganglion and immediately enters 
the infratemporal fossa through the foramen ovale.
The motor root of the trigeminal nerve after emerging 
from the pons passes forward and laterally deep to the 
sensory root and trigeminal ganglion and enters the 
infratemporal fossa through the foramen ovale. After 
emerging from the foramen ovale, it immediately joins the 
mandibular nerve and thus the mandibular nerve contains 
both the motor and sensory fibres.
The ophthalmic division of the maxillary nerve is 
described in detail in Chapter 19 and maxillary and 
mandibular divisions in Chapter 10.
Distribution (Fig. 22.9): The summary of distribution of 
the three divisions of the trigeminal nerve is presented in 
Table 22.1.
Trigeminal neuralgia (tic douloureux): It is a clinical 
condition which presents as a paroxysmal episodes of 
severe pain of sudden onset and short duration in the area 
of distribution of one or more of the three divisions of the 
trigeminal nerve.
The ophthalmic division (CN V1) is not commonly 
involved. The most commonly trigeminal neuralgia is 
associated with maxillary (CN V2) and mandibular divisions 
(CN V3) of the trigeminal nerve. It is often associated with 
dental caries.
Clinical correlation
--- Page 355 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
Fig. 22.9 Trigeminal nerve: A, divisions and branches; B, cutaneous distribution (AE = anterior ethmoidal, IT = infratrochlear, 
PE = posterior ethmoidal, SO = supraorbital, ST = supratrochlear, V1 = ophthalmic division, V2 = maxillary division, V3 = mandibular 
division 1 = ciliary ganglion, 2 = pterygopalatine ganglion, 3 = otic ganglion, 4 = submandibular ganglion).
Mental nerve
Buccal nerve
Lingual nerve
Superior
alveolar nerves
Superior dental
plexus
Infraorbital nerve
Inferior
alveolar nerve
Mylohyoid
nerve
Auriculo-
temporal
nerve
Nervus
spinosus
Trigeminal
ganglion
Motor root
Sensory root
Frontal nerve
Lacrimal nerve
Nasociliary nerve
Chorda
tympani
Ophthalmic
nerve (V1)
Maxillary
nerve (V2)
Mandibular
nerve (V3)
C2,C3
C3,C4
Fig. 22.10 Functional components and nuclei of the facial 
nerve.
Superior salivatory and
lacrimatory nuclei
Motor nucleus
of facial nerve
Pons
Geniculate ganglion
Spinal nucleus and
tract of trigeminal nerve
Nucleus of tractus
solitarius
Facial colliculus
Abducent
nucleus
expression. It is the most frequently paralyzed of all the 
peripheral nerves of the body.
Functional Components and Nuclei (Fig. 22.10)
1. Special visceral efferent fibres. They arise from the 
motor nucleus of the facial nerve in the pons and supply 
the muscles of facial expression.
Table 22.1 Summary of distribution of three divisions of 
the maxillary nerve
Nerve/Division Distribution
Ophthalmic
(sensory)
Upper third of the face including eyeball, 
conjunctiva, nasal cavity, lacrimal gland, scalp 
up to vertex. Ophthalmic nerve also forms the 
afferent limb of corneal reflex
Maxillary
(sensory)
Middle third of the face including most of nasal 
cavity, upper teeth and gums, maxillary sinus, 
mucous membrane of pharynx, palate, dura 
mater of middle cranial fossa. Maxillary nerve 
conveys secretomotor fibres to the lacrimal 
gland and the glands of palate, nose, and oral 
cavity
Mandibular
(mixed)
Sensory: Lower third of the face (except the 
small area over the angle of mandible) including 
part of auricle, temple 
Motor: Muscles of mastication, mylohyoid, 
anterior belly of digastric, tensor palati, and 
tensor tympani. Mandibular nerve forms both 
the limbs of masticatory reflex
FACIAL NERVE
Facial nerve is the 7th cranial nerve. It is a mixed (i.e., motor 
and sensory) nerve, but predominantly it is motor. It is 
named facial nerve because it supplies the muscles of facial
--- Page 356 ---
Cranial Nerves
After emerging from the brainstem, the roots of the 
facial nerve pass laterally and forward in the cerebello-
pontine angle, along with the vestibulocochlear and 
labyrinthine artery. All these structures then enter the 
internal acoustic meatus. In the meatus, the motor root is 
lodged in a groove on the vestibulocochlear nerve, while 
the sensory root remains separate. At the lateral end 
(bottom) of the internal acoustic meatus, two roots unite 
to form the trunk of the facial nerve. (Here it is important 
to note that the bottom or fundus of the internal acoustic 
meatus forms the medial wall of the bony labyrinth of the 
internal ear.) The facial nerve enters the facial canal in the 
petrous temporal bone through its opening in the fundus 
of the internal acoustic meatus.
The facial canals divide into three segments: labyrinthine, 
tympanic, and mastoid.
The labyrinthine segment of the facial canal lies above 
the vestibule of bony labyrinth and bends to reach the 
anterosuperior part of the medial wall of the middle ear 
(tympanum) near the processus cochleariformis. Here the 
canal bends sharply backward. The facial nerve coursing 
through the labyrinthine segment of canal also makes a 
sharp bend called the external genu of the facial nerve
which possesses the geniculate ganglion.
Fig. 22.11 Origin, course, and distribution of the facial nerve (SP = sympathetic plexus around internal carotid artery).
Temporal
Zygomatic
Buccal
Mandibular
Cervical
Parotid
gland
Nerve to
stylohyoid
Nerve to posterior
belly of digastric
Occipitalis
Posterior
auricular nerve
Stylomastoid
foramen
Geniculate
ganglion
Sensory
root
Pontomedullary
junction
Motor root
Pons
Greater
petrosal nerve
Nerve of
pterygoid canal
Pterygopalatine
ganglion
Lacrimal
gland
Deep petrosal nerve
Tongue
Lingual
nerve
Nerve to stapedius
Chorda
tympani nerve
Styloid
process
Submandibular
gland
Submandibular ganglion
Sublingual gland
Medulla
oblongata
Terminal
branches
Midbrain
2. General visceral efferent fibres. These are preganglionic 
parasympathetic fibres which arise from lacrimatory 
and superior salivatory nuclei in the brainstem. They 
supply 
secretomotor 
fibres 
lacrimal, 
submandibular, and sublingual glands.
3. Special visceral afferent fibres. They carry special 
sensations of taste from anterior two-third of the tongue 
except vallate papillae and terminate in the nucleus of 
tractus solitarius (gustatory nucleus) in the brainstem.
4. General somatic afferent fibres. They carry general 
sensations from the skin of the auricle and terminate in 
the spinal nucleus of the trigeminal nerve.
N.B. The cell bodies of SVA and GVA fibres are located in 
the geniculate ganglion.
Course and Relations (Fig. 22.11)
This nerve consists of two distinct roots: (a) a large medial 
motor root (the facial nerve proper) and (b) a small lateral 
sensory root (the nervous intermedius). The two roots arise 
from the pontomedullary junction lateral to the superior 
end of the olive of the medulla. The sensory root lies between 
the motor root of facial medially and the vestibulocochlear 
nerve laterally.
--- Page 357 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
Thetympanic segment of the facial canal runs horizontally 
backward in the medial wall of the middle ear till it reaches 
the junction of the medial and posterior wall of the middle 
ear. The bulge of the tympanic segment of the facial canal is 
seen in the medial wall of the middle ear above the 
promontory and fenestra vestibuli and below the bulge 
produced by the lateral semicircular canal.
The mastoid segment begins at the junction of the medial 
and posterior wall of the middle ear and passes vertically 
downward in the posterior wall of the middle ear till it 
reaches the stylomastoid foramen at the base of the skull.
The facial nerve comes out of cranial cavity through the 
stylomastoid foramen.
The external cranial of the facial nerve is described in 
Chapter 8.
Branches and Distribution (Fig. 22.11)
Greater petrosal nerve—arises from the geniculate 
ganglion. It consists of preganglionic parasympathetic 
fibres which relay in the pterygopalatine ganglion and 
supply the secretomotor fibres to the lacrimal gland and 
the mucous glands of nasal cavity and palate.
2. Nerve to stapedius—arises from the vertical part of the 
facial nerve opposite the pyramidal eminence, runs 
forward through a short canal within it to reach the 
stapedius muscle to supply it.
Chorda tympani nerve—arises from the vertical part of 
the facial nerve about 6 mm above the stylomastoid 
foramen, and enters the middle ear through the posterior 
canaliculus (on the posterior wall of the middle ear), 
runs across its lateral wall of the middle ear (pars flaccida 
of the tympanic membrane); passing between the long 
process of incus and the handle of malleus, and leaves the 
middle ear by entering the anterior canaliculus (on the 
anterior wall of the middle ear). It then traverses through 
the bony canaliculus and enters the inferotemporal fossa 
through the medial end of petrotympanic fissure. After 
emerging from the petrotympanic fissure, it runs 
medially forward and downward, crossing the medial 
aspect of the spine of sphenoid, to join the posterior 
aspect of the lingual nerve.
The chorda tympani nerve consists of two types of 
fibres:
(a) Preganglionic parasympathetic (GVE) fibres, which 
provide secretomotor supply to the submandibular 
and sublingual glands.
(b) Special visceral afferent fibres, which carry taste 
sensations from anterior two-third of the tongue.
4. Posterior auricular nerve—supplies the occipital belly 
of occipitofrontalis.
5. Nerve to the posterior belly of digastric—supplies the 
concerned muscle.
6. Nerve to stylohyoid—supplies the concerned muscle.
7. Five terminal branches (temporal, zygomatic, buccal, 
marginal, mandibular, and cervical)—supply the mus-
cles of facial expression.
• Lesions of facial nerve: These can be supranuclear or 
infranuclear (Fig. 22.12).
A supranuclear lesion (i.e., in hemiplegia) spares the 
upper part of the face because nuclear fibres supplying 
the muscles of the upper part of the face are innervated 
by the corticonuclear fibres of both the cerebral 
hemispheres. In the supranuclear lesion, only lower half of 
the face on the opposite side is paralyzed.
All infranuclear lesions involve whole of the face on the 
same side.
The signs and symptoms of infranuclear lesions differ 
according to the site of the lesion:
 Site A At or just above the stylomastoid foramen: It 
causes Bell’s palsy which presents as loss of 
motor functions of all muscles of facial expression 
leading to the deviation of mouth toward the 
normal side, inability to close the mouth and eye, 
and accumulation of food in the vestibule of 
mouth flattening of expression lines (for details 
see page 58).
 Site B Above the origin of chorda tympani: All the signs 
and symptoms of lesion A (i.e., Bell’s palsy) plus 
decreased salivation and loss of taste sensations 
in the anterior two-third of the tongue.
 Site C Above the origin of nerve to stapedius: All the 
signs and symptoms of lesion B plus hyperacusis 
(i.e., enhanced sensitivity to hearing).
 Site D
At the geniculate ganglion: All the signs and 
symptoms of lesion C plus loss of lacrimation.
• Crocodile tears syndrome: It is a clinical condition 
characterized by paroxysmal lacrimation during eating. It 
results in the facial nerve lesion proximal to the geniculate 
ganglion because regenerating preganglionic fibres meant 
to provide secretomotor supply to the submandibular and 
sublingular salivary glands during regeneration are 
misdirected and grow in the endoneural sheaths of 
preganglionic secretomotor fibres which supply the lacrimal 
gland.
• Ramsay Hunt syndrome: It occurs due to the involvement 
of geniculate ganglion in herpes zoster infection. Clinically, 
it presents with the following signs and symptoms:
– Herpetic vesicles on the auricle.
– Hyperacusis.
– Loss of lacrimation.
– Loss of taste sensations in the anterior two-third of the 
tongue.
– Complete ipsilateral facial palsy (Bell’s palsy).
Clinical correlation
VESTIBULOCOCHLEAR NERVE
Vestibulocochlear nerve is the 8th cranial nerve. It consists of 
two distinct parts: (a) a vestibular part, called the vestibular
--- Page 358 ---
Cranial Nerves
Functional Component and Nuclei
Special somatic afferent fibres: They carry sensory infor-
mation necessary for the maintenance of equilibrium and 
hearing from the membranous labyrinth of the internal ear.
The fibres carrying the sensory information for equilib-
rium terminate in the vestibular nuclei within the brainstem.
The fibres carrying the sensory information for hearing 
terminate in the dorsal and ventral cochlear nuclei, located 
respectively on the dorsal and ventral aspects of the inferior 
cerebellar peduncle.
Course and Relations
The vestibular nerve arises from the lateral aspect of the 
pontomedullary junction, passes through the pontocerebel-
lar angle and enters the internal acoustic meatus along with 
the facial nerve and labyrinthine vessels.
The vestibular ganglion (also called Scarpa’s ganglion) is 
located on the vestibular nerve in the lateral part of the inter-
nal acoustic meatus. It consists of bipolar sensory neurons. 
In the lateral part of the internal acoustic meatus, the nerve 
divides into three distinct branches: superior and inferior 
divisions and singular nerve. These branches pass through 
the foramina in the fundus of the meatus and innervate the 
sensory receptors for equilibrium (cristae ampullaris and 
maculae) in the membranous labyrinth of the internal ear.
The cochlear nerve also arises from the lateral aspect of 
the pontomedullary junction and takes a similar course to 
enter the internal acoustic meatus. At the medial end of 
the internal acoustic meatus, it enters into bony labyrinth 
of the middle ear through tractus spiralis foraminosus in 
the fundus of the meatus and reaches the modiolus of the 
internal ear. In the modiolus, the cochlear nerve possesses 
a sensory ganglion called the spiral ganglion made of 
bipolar neurons. The peripheral process of these neurons 
innervates the sensory receptor of hearing—the organ of 
Corti.
Fig. 22.12 Effects of supranuclear (UMN) and infranuclear 
(LMN) lesions of the facial nerve.
Cerebral cortex
Corticonuclear
fibres
UMN lesions
(supranuclear)
Paralysis of lower face
on the opposite side
Nuclear
Infranuclear
lesions
Paralysis of upper
as well as lower
face on the same
side
LMN lesion
UMN lesion
Facial nerve
nucleus
Maculae
and cristae
ampullaris
Spiral
organ of
Corti
Sensory receptor
of hearing
Internal acoustic meatus
Vestibular
nerve
Cochlear
nerve
Spiral
ganglion
Vestibular (Scarpa’s)
ganglion
Internal acoustic
meatus
Vestibular
nuclei
Dorsal cochlear
nucleus
Inferior cerebellar
peduncle
Ventral cochlear
nucleus
Sensory receptors
for equilibrium
Fig. 22.13 Schematic diagram showing the course and distribution of the vestibular and cochlear nerves: A, vestibular nerve; 
B, cochlear nerve.
nerve, and (b) a cochlear part, called the cochlear nerve (Fig. 
22.13). The vestibular nerve is concerned with the 
maintenance of equilibrium, while the cochlear nerve is 
concerned with hearing.
--- Page 359 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
• Lesions of vestibulocochlear nerve: The lesions of the 
vestibulo-cochlear nerve clinically present as:
(a) tinnitus (ringing or buzzing in the ears),
(b) impairment or loss of hearing, and
(c) loss of balance (vertigo).
The vestibular nerve is commonly involved by acoustic 
neuroma, which arises from the sheath cells of its constituent 
fibres in the region of cerebellopontine angle. The acoustic 
neuroma is one of the common intracranial tumors, and if 
large, it may involve the adjacent trigeminal, facial, and 
glossopharyngeal nerves and may compress cerebellum and 
medulla.
Clinical correlation
THE LAST FOUR CRANIAL NERVES
The last four cranial nerves are the nerves of the neck and 
closely related to each other, hence described together. The last 
four cranial nerves leave the skull close together, the 
glossopharyngeal, vagus, and accessory through the jugular 
foramen, and the hypoglossal nerve through the hypoglossal 
canal (Fig. 22.14).
At first, they lie between the internal jugular vein and the 
internal carotid artery, where the cranial root of the accessory 
nerve joins the vagus nerve and is distributed through it. 
Thereafter, the glossopharyngeal nerve passes forward across 
the internal carotid artery and then deep to the external 
carotid artery. The spinal accessory nerve passes backward 
across the internal jugular vein and the vagus nerve passes 
straight down in the deeper plane between the internal 
jugular vein and the internal carotid artery. The hypoglossal 
nerve is medial to others, curves round behind the vagus 
nerve, and then passes forward, superficial to the vagus 
nerve, internal carotid, and external carotid arteries.
The close relationship of the last four cranial nerves can 
be well appreciated by studying the features of the base of the 
skull around the jugular foramen.
The jugular foramen is located in front of the jugular 
process of the occipital bone. The jugular fossa is a bony 
depression between the jugular foramen and base of the 
skull.
GLOSSOPHARYNGEAL NERVE
Glossopharyngeal nerve is the 9th cranial nerve. It is a 
mixed nerve, i.e., composed of both the motor and sensory 
fibres, but predominantly it is sensory. It derives its name 
from the fact that it provides sensory innervation to the 
tongue and pharynx.
Functional Components and Nuclei (Fig. 22.15)
1. Special visceral efferent fibres: They supply the 
stylopharyngeus muscle. They arise from nucleus
ambiguus.
2. General visceral efferent fibres: They supply the 
secretomotor fibres to the parotid gland. They are 
Fig. 22.14 Relationship of the last four cranial nerves at the base of the skull.
Hypoglossal canal
Jugular foramen
Carotid canal
Internal carotid artery
External carotid artery
Glossopharyngeal (IX) nerve 
Pharyngeal branch of vagus (X)
Hypoglossal nerve
Nerve to geniohyoid (C1 fibres)
Nerve to thyrohyoid (C1 fibres)
Internal laryngeal nerve
External laryngeal nerve
Occipital codyle
Spinal accessory nerve
Superior root of
ansa cervicalis
Inferior root of
ansa cervicalis
Internal jugular vein
--- Page 360 ---
Cranial Nerves
preganglionic parasympathetic fibres and arise from the 
inferior salivatory nucleus.
Special visceral afferent fibres: They carry taste sensations 
from the posterior one-third of tongue including vallate 
papillae and terminate in the nucleus tractus solitarius.
4. General visceral afferent fibres: They carry general 
sensations of pain, touch, and temperature from the 
mucous membrane of the pharynx, tonsil, soft palate, 
and the posterior one-third of tongue and terminate in 
the dorsal nucleus of the vagus.
5. General 
somatic 
afferent 
fibres: 
They 
carry 
proprioceptive sensations from the stylopharyngeus and 
skin of the auricle and terminate in the nucleus of the 
spinal tract of 5th nerve.
Course and Relations (Fig. 22.16)
The glossopharyngeal nerve arises from the upper part of the 
lateral aspect of the medulla between the olive and the 
inferior cerebellar peduncle by three or four rootlets. The 
rootlets unite to form a single trunk which runs forward and 
laterally to leave the cranial cavity by passing through the 
intermediate compartment of the jugular foramen enclosed in 
a separate sheath of dura mater.
The superior and inferior sensory ganglia are located on 
the nerve as it passes through the jugular foramen.
The smaller superior ganglion lies within the jugular 
foramen and is considered the detached part of the inferior 
ganglion.
The larger inferior ganglion lies just below the jugular 
foramen and contains the cell bodies of most of the sensory 
fibres of the nerve.
After emerging from the jugular foramen at the base of 
the skull, the nerve passes downward and forward between 
the internal carotid artery and the internal jugular vein. It 
then descends anterior to the internal carotid artery to the 
styloid process and muscles attached to it (in this position, 
it lies lateral to the tonsillar bed formed by the superior 
constrictor) 
reach 
lower 
border 
stylopharyngeus. From here it passes along with the 
stylopharyngeus through the gap between the superior and 
middle constrictors of the pharynx.
It then curves forward along the lateral aspect of the 
stylopharyngeus muscle which it supplies, and then passes 
deep to the stylohyoid ligament and posterior edge of the 
hyoglossus muscle. Here it breaks up into terminal branches, 
which supply the mucous membrane of the posterior one-
third of the tongue, pharynx, and tonsil.
Branches and Distribution
The glossopharyngeal nerve gives the following important 
branches:
1. Tympanic branch (Jacobson’s nerve): It leaves the 
inferior ganglion and enters the middle ear through the 
tympanic canaliculus situated at the bony edge between 
the jugular foramen and carotid canal. It forms the 
tympanic plexus over the promontory of the middle ear. 
The tympanic plexus gives off:
(a) the lesser petrosal nerve and
(b) twigs to tympanic cavity, auditory tube, and mastoid 
air cells.
Fig. 22.15 Functional components and nuclei of the 
glossopharyngeal nerve.
Nucleus of
tractus solitarius
Dorsal
nucleus
of vagus
Inferior
salivatory
nucleus
Nucleus
ambiguus
Spinal nucleus
of trigeminal nerve 
Inferior
cerebellar peduncle
GSA: Ear
SVA: Taste
GVA: Tonsil,
pharynx and
tongue
GVE: Parotid
gland
SVE: Stylopharyngeus
Fig. 22.16 Course and distribution of the glossopharyngeal 
nerve.
Lesser superficial petrosal nerve
Otic ganglion
Parotid gland
Tympanic plexus
Tympanic branch
(Jacobson’s nerve)
Stylopharyngeus
Soft palate
Tonsil
Hyoid bone
Pharyngeal branch
Middle
constrictor
Carotid
sinus
Carotid
body
Superior ganglion
Inferior ganglion
Sinus nerve
Tongue
Facial nerve
--- Page 361 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
The lesser petrosal nerve carries the preganglionic 
parasympathetic fibres which relay in the otic ganglion. 
The postganglionic fibres from the ganglion supply the 
parotid gland.
2. Carotid nerve (nerve of Herring): It is a branch to 
carotid sinus and carotid body. It serves as an afferent 
limb for pressoreceptor and chemoreceptor reflexes 
from the carotid sinus and carotid body to regulate the 
heart rate and respiration, respectively.
3. Pharyngeal branch: It joins the pharyngeal branches of 
the vagus and the cervical sympathetic chain to form the 
pharyngeal plexus on the middle constrictor of the phar-
ynx.
4. Branch to stylopharyngeus: It arises as the nerve, winds 
round the stylopharyngeus muscle. It is the only motor 
branch of the glossopharyngeal nerve.
5. Tonsillar branches: They supply the mucous membrane 
of tonsil, fauces, and palate.
Lingual branches: They supply the posterior one-third of 
the tongue and vallate papillae and convey taste and gen-
eral sensations.
• Lesions of glossopharyngeal nerve: The lesion of the 
glossopharyngeal nerve is rare in isolation since there is 
often associated involvement of the vagus nerve. 
However, the complete lesion of the glossopharyngeal 
nerve results in:
(a) the loss of taste and general sensations over the 
posterior one-third of the tongue,
(b) difficulty in swallowing,
(c) the loss of the salivation from the parotid gland, and
(d) the unilateral loss of the gag reflex (see Chapter 14).
• Glossopharyngeal neuralgia, although rare, may occur. 
It is characterized by paroxysmal attacks of intractable 
pain in the area of the sensory distribution of the 
glossopharyngeal nerve, e.g., throat, tongue, and ear, 
precipitated by swallowing.
• Clinical testing of glossopharyngeal nerve: The 
glossopharyngeal nerve can be tested clinically by:
(a) eliciting the gag refl ex (i.e., on tickling the posterior 
wall of the pharynx, soft palate, or tonsillar fossa, 
there is reflex contraction of pharyngeal muscles 
causing gagging and retching), and
(b) testing the taste sensations in the posterior one-third 
of the tongue.
Clinical correlation
VAGUS NERVE
Vagus nerve is the 10th cranial nerve. It is a mixed nerve, i.e., 
composed of both the motor and sensory fibres but 
predominantly it is motor. It is the longest and most widely 
distributed cranial nerve. It is so called because of its 
extensive vague course and distribution. It is a vagrant or 
wandering nerve. Its field of distribution extends beyond 
the head and neck—to the thorax and abdomen. It conveys 
most of the efferent fibres of the cranial part of the 
parasympathetic outflow and distributes the fibres of an 
cranial part of the accessory nerve.
Functional Components and Nuclei (Fig. 22.17)
Special visceral efferent fibres: supply the muscles of 
palate, pharynx, and larynx. They arise from nucleus
ambiguus.
2. General visceral efferent fibres: arise from the dorsal 
nucleus of vagus, and provide parasympathetic innervation 
to heart, bronchial tree, and most of the GIT. 
3. Special visceral afferent fibres: carry taste sensations from 
the posteriormost part of the tongue and epiglottis and
terminate in the nucleus tractus solitarius.
4. General visceral afferent fibres: carry general sensations 
from the mucous membrane of pharynx, larynx, trachea, 
esophagus, and thoracic and abdominal viscera and 
terminate in the nucleus tractus solitarius and some in 
the dorsal nucleus of the vagus.
5. General somatic afferent fibres: carry general sensations 
from skin of the auricle and terminate in the nucleus of 
the spinal tract of the trigeminal nerve.
Course and Relations (Fig. 22.18)
The vagus nerve arises from the lateral aspect of the medulla 
between the olive and inferior cerebellar peduncle by about 
10 rootlets below and in line of the rootlets of the 
glossopharyngeal nerve. These nerve rootlets unite to form 
the nerve trunk which runs laterally, crosses the jugular 
tubercle, and leaves the cranial cavity by passing through the 
middle part of the jugular foramen enclosed in the common 
dural sheath with the 11th nerve.
Fig. 22.17 Functional components and nuclei of the vagus 
nerve.
Inferior cerebellar peduncle
Nucleus tractus solitarius
Dorsal nucleus
of vagus
Spinal nucleus
of trigeminal nerve
GSA: Ear
SVA: Taste
GVA: Pharynx,
larynx, trachea
GVE: Parasympathetic to heart,
respiratory tract and GIT
SVE: Palate,
pharynx, larynx
Nucleus
ambiguus
--- Page 362 ---
Cranial Nerves
The superior and inferior sensory ganglia are located on 
the nerve as it passes through the jugular foramen:
1. A smaller superior ganglion lies within the jugular 
foramen.
2. The larger inferior (nodose) ganglion lies just below the 
jugular foramen. Both the ganglia contain the cell bodies 
of the sensory fibres of the vagus nerve. The superior 
ganglion contains the cell bodies of GSA fibres, whereas 
the inferior ganglion contains the cell bodies of visceral 
afferent fibres. The cranial root of the accessory (11th) 
nerve unites with the vagus nerve just below its inferior 
ganglion and thus transfers all its fibres to the vagus 
nerve for distribution.
After coming out of the cranial cavity through the jugular 
foramen, the nerve runs vertically downward within the 
carotid sheath in the neck first between the internal jugular 
vein laterally and the internal carotid artery medially and 
then between the internal jugular vein (laterally) and the 
common carotid artery (medially).
At the root of the neck, the nerve enters the thorax. The 
right vagus nerve enters the thorax by crossing in front of 
the right subclavian artery, whereas the left vagus nerve
enters the thorax by passing between the left common carotid 
and left subclavian arteries.
For course of vagus nerves in the thorax, see Textbook of 
Anatomy: Upper Limb and Thorax, Vol. I by Vishram Singh.
Branches and Distribution (Fig. 22.18)
The branches and distribution of the vagus nerve in the 
region of head and neck are as follows:
1. Meningeal branch: It arises from the superior ganglion,
takes a recurrent course, and enters the cranial cavity 
through the jugular foramen to supply the dura mater of 
the posterior cranial fossa.
2. Auricular branch (Arnold’s nerve or Alderman’s nerve):
It arises from the superior ganglion, enters the mastoid
canaliculus on the lateral wall of the jugular fossa, and 
emerges through the tympanomastoid fissure just behind 
the external auditory meatus to supply the skin on the 
back of the meatus and adjoining part of the auricle. Then 
it enters the meatus between its bony and cartilaginous 
parts to supply the floor of the meatus and the tympanic 
membrane. Stimulation of this nerve, as in syringing of 
the ear, may cause reflex coughing (ear cough), vomit-
ing, and even cardiac arrest.
3. Pharyngeal branch: It arises from the inferior ganglion,
passes forward between the internal and external carotid 
arteries, and takes part in the formation of pharyngeal 
plexus. It supplies:
(a) all the muscles of pharynx except the stylopharyn-
geus, which is supplied by the glossopharyngeal 
nerve, and
(b) all the muscles of soft palate except the tensor palati 
which is supplied by the mandibular nerve (through 
the nerve to medial pterygoid).
Branches to carotid body: It arises from the inferior 
ganglion.
5. Superior laryngeal nerve (nerve of 4th arch): It arises 
from the inferior ganglion, passes downward and forward 
deep to the internal carotid artery to reach the middle 
constrictor where it divides into external and internal 
laryngeal nerves:
(a) The external laryngeal nerve (motor) runs down-
ward in company with superior thyroid vessels and 
supplies cricothyroid muscle. It also gives twigs to 
the inferior constrictor and pharyngeal plexus.
(b) The internal laryngeal nerve (sensory) passes 
downward and forward toward the gap between the 
middle and inferior constrictors. It pierces the 
thyrohyoid membrane to enter the larynx. It 
supplies the:
Fig. 22.18 Course and distribution of the vagus nerve 
(right) in the head and neck.
Meningeal branch
Jugular foramen
Auricular branch
(Alderman’s nerve)
Pharyngeal branch
Superior laryngeal nerve
Internal
laryngeal nerve
External
laryngeal nerve
Cricothyroid
muscle
Trachea
Recurrent
laryngeal nerve
Cranial root of
accessory nerve
Sinus nerve
Esophagus
Carotid sinus
Subclavian
artery
--- Page 363 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
(i) mucous membrane of larynx above the vocal 
cords, and
 
(ii) mucous membrane of the pharynx, epiglottis, 
vallecula, and the posteriormost part of the 
tongue.
6. Superior and inferior cervical cardiac branches: The 
superior cardiac branch arises in the upper part of the 
neck and the inferior cardiac branch in the lower part of 
the neck. They enter the thorax through the thoracic 
inlet. They carry preganglionic parasympathetic fibres to 
the heart and are cardio-inhibitory. The inferior cervical 
cardiac branch of the left vagus nerve joins the superficial 
cardiac plexus. The remaining cervical cardiac branches 
of both the vagus nerves join the deep cardiac plexus.
7. Recurrent laryngeal nerve (nerve of 6th arch):
(a) On the right side, it arises in the root of the neck from 
the vagus nerve as it crosses in front of the subclavian 
artery, winds around the first part of the subclavian 
artery, and then ascends up (in a recurrent direction) 
in the tracheoesophageal groove.
(b) On the left side, it arises in the superior mediastinum 
from the vagus nerve as it crosses the arch of the aorta 
(lateral aspect). It hooks below the arch of the aorta 
on the left side of ligamentum arteriosum behind the 
arch of aorta on its way to the tracheoesophageal 
groove.
The recurrent laryngeal nerve provides motor 
innervation to all the intrinsic muscles of the larynx 
(except the cricothyroid which is supplied by the 
external laryngeal nerve) and sensory innervation 
to the mucous membrane of laryngeal cavity up to 
the vocal cord.
Each recurrent laryngeal nerve passes deep to the inferior 
constrictor muscle to enter the laryngeal cavity deep to the 
cricothyroid joint. Now it is called the inferior laryngeal nerve.
• Alderman’s nerve phenomenon: The tickling of the 
cutaneous distribution of the vagus nerve stimulates jaded 
appetite. The Alderman in ancient Roman days used to 
stimulate their appetite by dropping cold water behind the 
ear supplied by the auricular branch of the vagus nerve. 
For this reason, the auricular branch of the vagus nerve is 
also called Alderman’s nerve. Apparently, this occurs by a 
reflex increase in gastric motility supplied by the vagus 
nerve (to the stomach).
• Lesions of vagus nerve: The bilateral lesions of vagus 
nerve cause:
(a) nasal regurgitation of the swallowed liquids,
(b) nasal twang of voice,
(c) hoarseness of voice,
(d) flattering of palatal arches,
(e) cadaveric position of vocal cards,
(f) dysphagia, and
(g) loss of cough reflex.
Clinical correlation
• Clinical testing of vagus nerve: The vagus nerve can be 
tested clinically by asking the patient to open his mouth 
and say ‘ah’, and then comparing the palatal arches of the 
two sides. If the vagus is intact, the soft palate rises (is 
elevated) in the midline. In bilateral lesions, the soft palate 
drops. In the unilateral lesion, there is flattening (drooping) 
of palate arch on the side of paralysis and uvula pulled to 
the normal side.
ACCESSORY NERVE
Accessory nerve is the 11th cranial nerve. It is purely motor. 
It consists of two roots: cranial and spinal.
The cranial root is accessory to the vagus and its fibres are 
distributed through the vagus nerve.
The spinal root has an independent course and is generally 
regarded as spinal accessory nerve, or simply as accessory 
nerve.
Functional Components and Nuclei (Fig. 22.19)
1. Special visceral efferent fibres: provide motor supply to 
the muscles of soft palate, pharynx, and larynx. They arise 
from the nucleus ambiguus and form the cranial root.
2. General somatic efferent fibres: provide motor supply to 
the sternocleidomastoid and trapezius muscles. They 
arise from the spinal nucleus of accessory nerve, in the 
ventral horns of the upper five spinal segments and form 
the spinal root.
Course and Relations (Fig. 22.20)
The cranial root arises by four or five rootlets from the 
posterolateral sulcus of the medulla between the olive and 
inferior cerebellar peduncle. The rootlets are attached in line 
with the rootlets of the vagus nerve above. These rootlets 
Fig. 22.19 Functional components and nuclei of the 
accessory nerve.
Nucleus
ambiguus
Foramen
magnum
Spinal
nucleus of
accessory
nerve
Cranial root
Spinal root
SVE: Muscles of 
palate, pharynx
and larynx
GSE: Sternocleidomastoid 
and trapezius
--- Page 364 ---
Cranial Nerves
unite together to form a single trunk which runs laterally 
along with the 9th and 10th cranial nerves to reach the 
jugular foramen where it is joined by the spinal root.
The spinal root arises by a number of rootlets from the 
lateral aspect of the spinal cord (upper five cervical spinal 
segments) along a vertical line between the ventral and dorsal 
roots of the spinal nerves. These rootlets unite to form a 
single trunk which ascends in the vertebral canal to enter the 
cranial cavity through the foramen magnum behind the 
vertebral artery. The spinal root leaves the skull through the 
jugular foramen where it fuses with the cranial root. The 
combined trunk comes out of the cranial cavity through the 
middle compartment of the jugular foramen enclosed in the 
dural sheath along with the vagus nerve. Immediately after 
coming out of the cranial cavity, the two roots again separate. 
The cranial root joins the vagus nerve just below its inferior 
ganglion and is distributed through the branches of the 
vagus to the muscles of the palate, pharynx, and larynx.
The spinal root of the accessory nerve descends vertically 
downward between the internal jugular vein and the internal 
carotid artery. As it reaches a point midway between the 
angle of the mandible and the mastoid process, it turns 
downward and backward across (superficial or deep) the 
internal jugular vein toward the carotid triangle. It crosses in 
front of the transverse process of the atlas under the posterior 
belly of the digastric muscle and occipital artery. Here it is 
accompanied by the upper sternomastoid branch of the 
occipital artery.
The nerve pierces the sternocleidomastoid muscle at the 
junction of its upper one-fourth with the lower three-fourth 
and supplies it. The nerve passes through the muscle and 
emerges through its posterior border a little above its middle 
to enter the posterior triangle where it runs downward and 
backward underneath the fascial roof of the posterior 
triangle, parallel to the fibres of levator scapulae.
It leaves the posterior triangle by passing deep to the 
anterior border of the trapezius about 5 cm above the clavicle.
The spinal accessory nerve communicates with the C2, 
C3, and C4 spinal nerves. The C2 and C3 spinal nerves carry 
proprioceptive fibres from the sternocleidomastoid while C3 
and C4 carry proprioceptive fibres from the trapezius mus-
cle.
Distribution (Fig. 22.20)
The cranial root of the accessory nerve via the vagus nerve 
and pharyngeal plexus of nerves supplies:
1. All the muscles of the palate except the tensor palati and 
tensor tympani which are supplied by the mandibular 
nerve (nerve to medial pterygoid):
(a) All the muscles of the pharynx except the stylopharyn-
geus which is supplied by the glossopharyngeal 
nerve.
(b) All the intrinsic muscles of larynx.
The spinal root of the accessory nerve supplies the following 
two muscles:
1. Sternocleidomastoid muscle along with C2 and C3 
spinal nerves.
2. Trapezius muscle along with C3 and C4 spinal nerves.
• Lesions of spinal accessory nerve: It may be damaged 
by the fracture base of the skull through the jugular foramen 
or stab wounds in the neck or during the surgical removal of 
cervical lymph nodes.
Unilateral/lesion of the spinal accessory nerve proximal to 
sternocleidomastoid causes:
– ipsilateral paralysis of the sternocleidomastoid, with the 
result that the patient is unable to tilt his head toward 
the ipsilateral shoulder and unable to turn his face 
toward the opposite side,
– paralysis of trapezius, with the result that the patient is 
unable to shrug his shoulder against the resistance.
• Spasmodic torticollis: It may result from irritative central 
lesions of the spinal accessory nerve. It is characterized 
by clonic spasms of the sternocleidomastoid muscle.
Clinical correlation
Fig. 22.20 Distribution of the cranial and spinal roots of the 
accessory nerve.
Vagus nerve
Cranial root of
accessory nerve
Spinal root of
accessory nerve
Accessory nerve
Muscles of
palate
Muscles of
pharynx
Muscles of
larynx
Spinal accessory nerve
Sternocleidomastoid
Trapezius
Foramen
magnum
--- Page 365 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
Fig. 22.22 Course and distribution of the hypoglossal nerve.
Genioglossus
Geniohyoid
Nerve to geniohyoid (C1)
Nerve to thyrohyoid (C1)
External carotid artery
Superior root of ansa cervicalis
(descendens hypoglossi)
Thyrohyoid
Hypoglossal canal
Lower sternomastoid
branch of occipital artery
Inferior root of ansa cervicalis
(descendens cervicalis)
Ansa cervicalis
Styloglossus
Lingual nerve
Meningeal branch (C1)
Hypoglossal nerve
Loop of
lingual artery
• Clinical testing of spinal accessory nerve: The 
sternocleidomastoid muscle is tested by asking the 
patient to turn his face to the opposite against the 
resistance offered by the examiner’s hand. In a normal 
condition, a person can do it and sternocleidomastoid 
stands out prominently.
The trapezius muscle can be tested by asking the 
patient to shrug his shoulder against the resistance.
HYPOGLOSSAL NERVE
Hypoglossal nerve is the 12th cranial nerve. It is purely a 
motor nerve.
Functional Components and Nuclei (Fig. 22.21)
General somatic efferent fibres: These fibres arise from the 
hypoglossal nucleus and supply all the muscles of the tongue 
(extrinsic and intrinsic) which develop from occipital 
myotomes.
Course and Relations
The hypoglossal nerve arises on the ventral aspect of the 
medulla from the anterolateral sulcus between the pyramid 
and the olive by 10–15 rootlets.
The rootlets of the hypoglossal nerve are attached in line 
with the rootlets of the ventral root of the 1st cervical spinal 
nerve.
Fig. 22.21 Functional components and nucleus of the 
origin of the hypoglossal nerve.
Hypoglossal nucleus
Inferior
cerebellar
peduncle
Olive
Hypoglossal
nerve
Pyramid
GSE: Muscles
of tongue
The rootlets of the hypoglossal nerve run laterally and pass 
behind the vertebral artery to form two roots. The two roots 
pierce the dura mater separately near the anterior condylar 
(hypoglossal canal) in which they enter. In the canal, the two 
roots unite to form a single trunk and come out of the cranial 
cavity.
After coming out of the cranial cavity, the nerve lies deep 
to the internal carotid artery and the 9th and 10th cranial
--- Page 366 ---
Cranial Nerves
nerves. It then passes downward and laterally behind the 
internal carotid artery and the 9th and 10th cranial nerves to 
reach the interval between the internal jugular vein and the 
internal carotid artery. Now it descends vertically in this 
interval in front of the 10th nerve up to the level of the angle 
of the mandible. Here the nerve curves forward crossing in 
front of the internal and external carotid arteries, and the 
loop of the 1st part of the lingual artery to reach the poste-
rior margin of the hypoglossal muscle by passing deep to the 
tendon of the posterior belly of the digastric. Now it runs on 
the superficial surface of the hypoglossus, muscle below the 
deep part of the submandibular gland. At the anterior margin 
of the hyoglossus it lies on the genioglossus and runs forward 
and upward up to the tip of the tongue and ends by dividing 
into its terminal branches which supply the muscles of the 
tongue.
N.B. Some fibres of the 1st cervical nerve (ventral ramus) 
join the hypoglossal nerve and are distributed through its 
branches.
Branches and Distribution (Fig. 22.22)
The hypoglossal nerve gives the following branches:
1. Branches of the hypoglossal proper: They supply all the 
muscles of the tongue except palatoglossus which is 
supplied by the cranial root of accessory via the 
pharyngeal plexus.
2. Branches of the hypoglossal nerve containing C1 fibres: 
These are as follows:
(a) Meningeal branch: It arises from the nerve as it comes 
out through the hypoglossal canal taking a recurrent 
course, enters the cranial cavity through the 
hypoglossal canal, and supplies the dura mater of 
the posterior cranial fossa.
(b) Descendens hypoglossi or upper root of ansa cervicalis:
It arises as the nerve crosses in front of the internal 
carotid artery. It runs downward to join the inferior 
root of ansa cervicalis at the level of cricoid 
cartilage.
(c) Nerve to thyrohyoid: It crosses the greater cornu of 
the hyoid bone to reach the muscle.
(d) Nerve to geniohyoid: It arises from above the hyoid 
bone.
• Lesions of hypoglossal nerve: If the hypoglossal nerve 
is cut on one side, there will be lower motor neuron type of 
paralysis of muscles of the tongue on that side. On asking 
the patient to protrude his tongue, the tip of the tongue devi-
ates to the paralyzed side due to the unopposed action of 
the muscles of the healthy side.
• Supranuclear lesions involve corticonuclear fibres 
(upper motor neuron type of paralysis); in addition to 
paralysis of the muscles, there will also be fasciculations 
in tongue on the affected side and the mucous membrane 
will show wrinkling due to wasting of muscles and their 
fasciculations.
• Clinical testing of hypoglossal nerve: To test the 
integrity of the hypoglossal nerve, the functions of 
genioglossus muscles are assessed. The patient is asked 
to protrude the tongue. If the hypoglossal nerves of both 
sides are intact, the protruded tongue lies in the midline.
If the hypoglossal nerve of one side is damaged, the 
tongue deviates to the side of the lesion/paralysis.
If the hypoglossal nerves of both sides are damaged, the 
patient cannot protrude his tongue. It lies motionless in 
mouth causing difficulty in speech and swallowing.
Clinical correlation
--- Page 367 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
Golden Facts to Remember
  Most slender cranial nerve
Trochlear nerve
  All the cranial nerves arise from the ventral aspect 
of the brain except
Trochlear nerve, which arises from the dorsal aspect 
of the brain
  Largest cranial nerve
Trigeminal nerve
  Longest cranial nerve
Vagus nerve
  Most frequently paralyzed cranial nerve
Facial nerve
  Most commonly involved cranial nerve in 
increased intracranial pressure
Abducent nerve
  All the branches of glossopharyngeal nerve are 
sensory except
Nerve to the stylopharyngeus which is motor
  Most common condition affecting the sensory 
part of the trigeminal nerve
Trigeminal neuralgia (tic douloureux)
  All the sensory ganglia lie outside the cranial 
cavity except
Trigeminal ganglion which lies within the cranial 
cavity
  Only monosynaptic reflex is present in the brain
Masseteric reflex (or jaw jerk)
  Cranial nerve having the longest bony course
Facial nerve
  All the cranial nerves are true peripheral nerves 
except
Optic nerve which is (truely speaking) a tract of 
brain
A 70-year-old patient having long standing high blood 
pressure suffered from a stroke. He was taken to the 
hospital where he was diagnosed as a case of hemiplegia. 
The hemiplegia was associated with the upper motor 
neuron type of facial palsy. On examination, the lower 
half of left half of the face was found to be paralyzed. 
He was able to smile normally when he enjoyed a joke.
Questions
1. Why in the upper motor neuron type of facial palsy 
the upper part of face is usually spared?
2. How could a hemiplegic patient smile normally?
3. What is Bell’s palsy?
Answers
1. Due to the fact that it is innervated by both the 
cerebral hemispheres.
2. It is thought that such movements (e.g., smile) may 
have supranuclear connections separate from those 
commonly involved in hemiplegia, which probably 
do not descend in the internal capsule.
3. It is the lower motor neuron type of the facial palsy 
due to the compression of facial nerve at or just 
above the stylomastoid foramen.
Clinical Case Study
--- Page 368 ---
General Plan and 
Membranes of the Brain
CHAPTER
The central nervous system (CNS) consists of brain and the 
spinal cord. The brain lies within the cranial cavity and the 
spinal cord lies within the vertebral canal.
Structurally, both the brain and the spinal cord consist of 
grey and white matter. Therefore, sections through the CNS 
present greyish and whitish regions. The grey matter consists 
of nerve cell bodies and dendrites, and the white matter is 
made up predominantly of myelinated nerve fibres. In the 
brain (except the brainstem), the grey matter is present at the 
periphery and the white matter in the center. Contrary to it, 
in the spinal cord, the grey matter is present in the center and 
the white matter at the periphery.
Functionally, the CNS is concerned with (a) the reception 
and integration of sensory information from within and 
outside the body and (b) the production of motor responses
which are appropriate to the sum of the sensory information 
received by it.
The CNS develops from a hollow neural tube whose 
cavity persists in the adult brain and spinal cord in form of 
different cavities. Developmentally, the brain consists of the 
forebrain, midbrain, and hindbrain. The forebrain consists 
of the cerebrum and diencephalon. The midbrain is a small 
region which connects the forebrain with the hindbrain. The 
hindbrain consists of the pons, medulla oblongata, and 
cerebellum. The midbrain, pons, and medulla collectively 
form the brainstem.
The parts of brain and cavities within them are listed in 
Table 23.1.
Table 23.1 Parts of the brain and their cavities
Part of Brain
Cavity
Cerebrum (right and left
cerebral hemispheres)
Right and left lateral
ventricles
Diencephalon (thalamus
and hypothalamus)
Third ventricle
Midbrain
Cerebral aqueduct
Hind brain (pons, medulla,
and cerebellum)
Fourth ventricle
Fig. 23.1 Parts of the central nervous system.
Spinal cord
Midbrain
Pons
Medulla
Cerebellum
Cerebrum
Diencephalon
PARTS OF THE BRAIN
The brain is that part of the CNS which lies within the cranial 
cavity.
The adult brain constitutes about 1/50th of the body 
weight and weighs about 1400 g in males and 1200 g in 
females. It consists of the following six major parts 
(Fig. 23.1):
1. Cerebrum.
2. Diencephalon.
3. Midbrain.
4. Pons.
5. Medulla oblongata.
6. Cerebellum.
--- Page 369 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
CEREBRUM
The cerebrum is the largest part of the brain. It consists of 
two large hemispheres (the left and the right cerebral 
hemispheres), which occupy the anterior and middle 
cranial fossae, and the supratentorial region of the posterior 
cranial fossa.
Each cerebral hemisphere consists of a surface layer of 
grey matter, called the cerebral cortex, and a central core of 
white matter. In the basal part of the latter are located large 
masses of grey matter, known as basal nuclei/ganglia.
The two hemispheres are partly separated from each 
other by a deep median longitudinal fissure, called the 
longitudinal cerebral fissure. A massive commissure, the 
corpus 
callosum, 
whose 
fibres 
interconnect 
corresponding cortical areas of the two cerebral 
hemispheres, lies in the floor of this fissure.
The surface of cerebral cortex is convoluted, i.e., it has a 
series of elevations, the gyri, separated by shallow 
depressions, the sulci, or deep grooves called fissures
(Fig. 23.2).
There are individual differences in the appearance of the 
sulci and gyri, but some sulci are constant in their position 
and appearance and serve as important landmarks.
The superolateral surface of each cerebral hemisphere is 
divided into four lobes which are named after the overlying 
skull bones:
1. Frontal lobe—is anterior to the central sulcus and above 
the lateral sulcus.
2. Parietal lobe—is posterior to the central sulcus and 
above the lateral sulcus.
3. Occipital lobe—is behind a line extending from the 
parieto-occipital sulcus to the preoccipital notch.
4. Temporal lobe—is below the lateral sulcus and in front 
of preoccipital notch.
Frontal lobe: It is important for voluntary motor functions, 
motivation, aggression, emotions, affect, drive, and awareness 
of self.
Parietal lobe: It is the major center for reception and 
evaluation of all sensory information except smell, hearing, 
and vision.
Occipital lobe: It is responsible for reception and integration 
of visual input.
Temporal lobe: It receives and evaluates input for smell and 
hearing and plays an important role in memory.
N.B.
Deep within the lateral sulcus lies a submerged portion of 
cerebral cortex, the insula which is often referred to as the 
5th lobe or the central lobe of the cerebral hemisphere.
The so-called limbic lobe is a composite bordering zone 
(limbus = border) between the cerebrum and diencephalon. 
It is somewhat ring shaped. It is associated with basic survival 
instincts, viz. the acquisition of food and water and 
reproduction. It provides ability to store and retrieve 
Fig. 23.2 Lateral aspect of the left side of the brain. Note the four lobes on the superolateral surface of the cerebral 
hemisphere.
Cerebellum
Superior temporal gyrus
Superior
parietal
lobule
Inferior parietal
lobule
Postcentral gyrus
Precentral gyrus
Superior frontal gyrus
Middle frontal gyrus
Inferior frontal gyrus
Middle temporal gyrus
Inferior temporal gyrus
Postcalcarine sulcus
Preoccipital notch
Lunate sulcus
Parieto-occipital sulcus
Intraparietal sulcus
Postcentral sulcus
Central sulcus
Precentral sulcus
Lateral sulcus
Midbrain
Pons
Medulla oblongata
--- Page 370 ---
General Plan and Membranes of the Brain
information and is particularly important for short-term 
memory.
The medial surface of the cerebral hemisphere is 
visualized in the sagittal section of the brain and presents a 
number of features shown in Figure 23.3.
The inferior surface of the cerebral hemisphere is uneven 
and presents orbital and tentorial surfaces.
Basal Ganglia/Basal Nuclei
The basal ganglia are subcortical masses of grey matter which 
are situated in the white core of each cerebral hemisphere. 
The basal ganglia include corpus striatum, claustrum, and 
amygdaloid body.
During the development of connections between the 
cerebral cortex and the brainstem, the bundles of fibres 
converging as internal capsule partly divide the corpus 
striatum into a medial caudate nucleus and a lateral
lentiform nucleus. Between the internal capsule and the 
cerebral cortex, the nerve fibres diverge as the corona radiata.
Functionally, the basal ganglia also include the subtha-
lamic nucleus of diencephalon, and the substantia nigra and 
red nucleus of midbrain.
The basal ganglia influence the quality of motor perfor-
mance and are sometimes termed extrapyramidal nuclei.
DIENCEPHALON
The diencephalon is the part of brain between the cerebrum 
and the brainstem. It is almost entirely hidden from view by 
the cerebral hemispheres. The main components of the 
diencephalon are as follows:
1. Thalamus.
2. Hypothalamus.
3. Metathalamus.
4. Epithalamus.
5. Subthalamus.
Thalamus: The thalamus is a large ovoid mass of grey 
matter lying above the midbrain. The two thalami form by 
far the largest mass of the diencephalon and are separated 
from each other by a cavity of 3rd ventricle, and joined 
with each other by an interthalamic adhesion. It forms a 
great relay station for all sensory impulses except olfactory, 
visual, and auditory. It appreciates crude sensations such as 
pain and touch.
The thalamus also integrates motor functions.
Hypothalamus: The hypothalamus is the most inferior 
portion of the diencephalon and contains several small 
nuclei and nerve tracts. The most conspicuous nuclei called 
mammillary bodies appear as rounded elevations on the 
base of the brain in the region of interpeduncular fossa.
The hypothalamus regulates visceral activity through the 
autonomic nervous system and hormonal activity through 
the hypophysis cerebri.
Metathalamus: The metathalamus consists of two rounded 
medial and lateral geniculate bodies which protrude from 
the posteroinferior surface of the thalamus.
The medial and lateral geniculate bodies form relay 
stations for the special senses of hearing and vision, 
respectively.
Fornix
Septum pellucidum
Central sulcus
Precuneus
Medial frontal gyrus
Thalamus
Parieto-occipital sulcus
Calcarine sulcus
Postcalcarine sulcus
Cuneus
Pineal gland
Cerebellum
Median aperture
Fourth ventricle
Medulla
Midbrain
Pons
Mamillary body
Hypophysis
cerebri
Optic
chiasma
Lamina
terminalis
Hypothalamus
Anterior
commissure
Interventricular
foramen
Paracentral
lobule
Cingulate gyrus
Choroid plexus
Fig. 23.3 Median sagittal section of the brain.
--- Page 371 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
Epithalamus: The epithalamus is a small area of diencepha-
lon, posterosuperior to the thalamus. It consists of pineal 
gland and habenular nuclei. The pineal gland plays an 
important role in controlling the onset of puberty through 
its secretion. The reduction of pineal secretion precipitates 
puberty. The pineal gland is also involved in sleep-wake cycle.
The habenular nuclei have olfactory and limbic 
connections. They are influenced by smell and are involved 
in emotional and visceral responses to odors.
Subthalamus: The subthalamus is a small area of 
diencephalon that lies between the thalamus and the 
midbrain. It contains several nerve tracts, and the 
subthalamic nuclei which are associated with basal ganglia 
and are involved in controlling motor functions.
MIDBRAIN
The midbrain is the smallest segment of the brainstem. It is 
just superior to the pons and contains the nuclei of the 3rd 
(oculomotor), 4th (trochlear), and 5th (trigeminal) cranial 
nerves.
The midbrain is traversed by the cerebral aqueduct. The 
part dorsal to the aqueduct is called the tectum and consists 
of four surface elevations—the corpora quadrigemina 
(comprising two superior and two inferior colliculi). The 
superior and inferior colliculi receive visual and auditory 
impulses, respectively, and are concerned with reflexes 
involving these senses. The part ventral to the aqueduct is 
divided into right and left halves, the cerebral peduncles.
Each cerebral peduncle consists of a central part, the 
tegmentum, which is separated ventrally from the crus cerebri 
by a mass of pigmented grey matter, the substantia nigra.
The crus cerebri continues ipsilaterally with the internal 
capsule above and contains descending fibres from the 
cerebral cortex to the brainstem and spinal cord. The space 
between the two crura is termed the interpeduncular fossa.
The tegmentum largely consists of ascending tracts from 
the spinal cord to the thalamus and contains two large 
cigar-shaped nuclei called red nuclei. In cross section, the 
red nuclei appear as oval masses of the pinkish grey matter.
The red nuclei help in unconscious regulation and 
coordination of motor activities.
PONS
The pons (L. Pons  bridge) is the large middle part of the 
brainstem. It is continuous above with the midbrain and 
below with the medulla oblongata. It is so named because it 
forms a broad bridge between the two cerebellar 
hemispheres by its transverse fibres constituting the middle 
cerebellar peduncles. The vertical median sulcus on its 
ventral aspect lodges the basilar artery, and therefore, 
termed the basilar sulcus.
In the transverse section, the pons is seen to consist of a 
large ventral and a smaller dorsal region.
The ventral portion contains a large number of nuclei, 
the pontine nuclei, and longitudinal bundles of descending 
fibres of the pyramidal tract. The pontine nuclei relay 
information from the cerebrum to cerebellum and form a 
corticopontocerebellar pathway.
The dorsal portion or tegmentum of pons contains 
pontine sleep and respiratory centres. The pontine 
respiratory centre functions with the respiratory centre in 
the medulla to help in controlling the respiratory movements.
MEDULLA OBLONGATA
The medulla oblongata is the lower part of the brainstem 
and is continuous inferiorly with the spinal cord at the 
foramen magnum.
On the ventral aspect of medulla, there are two pyramid-
shaped elevations, one on either side of median plane called 
pyramids. These elevations are produced by the descending 
fibres of the corticospinal tracts involved in the conscious 
control of the skeletal muscles. Lateral to the pyramids, there 
are two oval elevations called olives containing inferior 
olivary nuclei. Dorsal to each olive is an inferior cerebellar 
peduncle.
On the dorsal aspect, on either side, the medulla has 
cuneate and gracile tubercles produced by similarly named 
nuclei beneath them.
Medulla contains various vital autonomic centres 
responsible for several reflexes, such as those involved in the 
regulation of heart rate, blood vessel diameter, breathing, 
swallowing, vomiting, coughing, and sneezing.
CEREBELLUM
The cerebellum lies dorsal to the pons and medulla and 
consists of two lateral hemispheres: the cerebellar 
hemispheres and a median worm-like part called vermis. It is 
connected to the midbrain, pons, and medulla by superior, 
middle, and inferior cerebellar peduncles, respectively. The 
surface of cerebellum has narrow transverse ridges called 
folia (leaf-like in sections) separated by deep fissures.
Functionally, the cerebellum is mainly concerned with the 
involuntary control of somatic motor activities, essential for 
the maintenance of equilibrium, muscle tone, and posture.
BASE OF THE BRAIN
The base of the brain presents: (a) orbital and tentorial 
surfaces of the frontal and temporal lobes of both the 
cerebral hemispheres, (b) interpeduncular fossa, (c) ventral 
aspects of the midbrain, pons, medulla oblongata and 
cerebellum, and (d) superficial attachment of the cranial 
nerves (Fig. 23.4).
--- Page 372 ---
General Plan and Membranes of the Brain
The interpeduncular fossa and superficial attachment of 
cranial nerves are briefly described here.
Interpeduncular Fossa (Fig. 23.5)
The interpeduncular fossa is a rhomboidal space bounded 
on either side by the crus cerebri of cerebral peduncles, 
anteriorly by optic chiasma and optic tracts, and posteriorly 
by the pons. The interpeduncular fossa contains: (a) two 
small spherical bodies called mammillary bodies, (b) a 
raised area of grey matter lying anterior to the mammillary 
bodies called tuber cinereum, (c) a narrow stalk which 
connects the hypophysis cerebri with the tuber cinereum 
called infundibulum, (d) posterior perforated substance,
which is a layer of grey matter in the angle between the crus 
cerebri and is pierced by the central branches of the posterior 
cerebral arteries, and (e) the oculomotor nerve which 
emerges immediately dorsomedial to the corresponding 
crus.
Superficial Attachments of the Cranial Nerves
All the 12 pairs of cranial nerves are attached on the ventral 
aspect of the brain except the 4th pair (trochlear nerves) 
which are attached on the dorsal aspect.
Each cranial nerve enters or leaves the brain surface at its 
superficial attachment and the fibres which it contains either 
arise from (efferent or motor fibres) or terminate in (afferent 
or sensory fibres) motor and sensory nuclei within the brain, 
respectively.
The first two pairs are attached to the forebrain; the 3rd 
and 4th to the midbrain; and the remainder to the hindbrain. 
The 11th cranial nerve also receives a root from the upper 
part of the spinal cord.
Fig. 23.4 Interior aspect of the brain. Note the attachment of cranial nerves.
Olfactory nerves (I)
Optic nerve (II)
Oculomotor nerve (III)
Trigeminal nerve (V)
Motor root
Sensory root
Abducent nerve (VI)
Glossopharyngeal nerve (IX)
Sensory root
Vagus nerve (X)
Vestibulocochlear nerve (VIII)
Accessory nerve (XI)
Hypoglossal nerve (XII)
Cerebellum
Olive
Spinal root of
accessory nerve
Pyramid
Middle cerebellar
peduncle
Parahippocampal
gyrus
Uncus
Interpeduncular
fossa
Optic chiasma
Mammillary body
Olfactory tract
Olfactory bulb
Pons
Trochlear nerve (IV)
Facial nerve (VII)
Motor root
Fig. 23.5 Boundaries and contents of the interpeduncular 
fossa.
Olfactory bulb
Olfactory tract
Optic
chiasma
Olfactory striae
Anterior perforated
substance
Infundibulum
Tuber cinereum
Mammillary bodies
Crus cerebri
Oculomotor nerve
Optic
tract
Trochlear
nerve
Posterior perforated
substance
Pons
--- Page 373 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
Sites of Attachments
Olfactory nerves
There are about 20 olfactory nerves on each side. They arise 
from the olfactory epithelium of nasal cavity and pass 
through the cribriform plate of ethmoid and end in the 
olfactory bulb which lies on the orbital surface of the 
frontal lobe. They are so delicate that no trace is seen on the 
olfactory bulb when the brain is removed from the cranial 
cavity.
Optic nerve
This is a thick cylindrical nerve which arises from the retina 
and joins the anterolateral angle of the optic chiasma.
Oculomotor nerve
It emerges from the groove on the medial aspect of the 
cerebral peduncle in the posterior part of the interpeduncular 
fossa.
Trochlear nerve
It is a slender nerve which emerges on the dorsal aspect of 
the midbrain, lateral to the median plane. It winds round the 
lateral aspect of the midbrain toward the interpeduncular 
fossa, immediately superior to the pons.
Trigeminal nerve
It is the largest of the cranial nerves and attached to the 
junction of the pons and middle cerebellar peduncle by two 
roots: a large lateral sensory root and a small medial motor 
root.
Abducent nerve
It emerges at the inferior border of the pons, opposite to the 
upper end of the medullary pyramid.
Facial nerve
It emerges at the inferior border of pons lateral to the 
abducent nerve by two roots: a thick medial motor root and 
a slender lateral sensory root called nervus intermedius.
Vestibulocochlear nerve
It consists of two nerves: vestibular and cochlear which are 
attached in the cerebello-pontine angle. The cochlear nerve 
lies posterior to the inferior cerebellar peduncle and 
vestibular anterior to it.
Glossopharyngeal nerve
It emerges by a number of rootlets from a groove between 
the olive and inferior cerebellar peduncle.
Vagus nerve
It also emerges by a number of rootlets from a groove 
between the olive and inferior cerebellar peduncle below the 
rootlets of the glossopharyngeal nerve.
Accessory nerve
It has two roots: cranial and spinal. The cranial root emerges 
by a number of rootlets from the medulla below the rootlets 
of the vagus nerve and it is joined by the spinal root, which 
emerges by a number of rootlets from the upper five cervical 
spinal segments.
Hypoglossal nerve
It arises by a row of rootlets from a groove between the 
pyramid and olive.
VENTRICLES OF THE BRAIN
There are four ventricles of the brain (Fig. 23.6): two lateral 
ventricles, a third ventricle, and a fourth ventricle.
The two lateral ventricles, one in each cerebral hemisphere, 
form the largest component of the ventricular system. They 
occupy a considerable part of the cerebral hemisphere and 
are separated from each other by the septum pellucidum, 
extending between the corpus callosum and the fornix. The 
3rd ventricle is a narrow slit-like cavity of the diencephalon. 
The two lateral ventricles are connected with the 3rd ventricle 
via the interventricular foramina (of Monro). The 3rd 
ventricle communicates via the cerebral aqueduct of 
midbrain with the 4th ventricle, a cavity within the hindbrain. 
The 4th ventricle in turn is continuous with the central canal 
of the spinal cord. The central canal has a small dilatation at 
its inferior end, the terminal ventricle.
The cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) is formed in the ventricles 
by the choroid plexuses and passes through apertures in the 
roof of 4th ventricle into the subarachnoid space around the 
brain and spinal cord.
MEMBRANES OF THE BRAIN (MENINGES)
The brain and spinal cord are enclosed within three 
protective membranes called meninges (Fig. 23.7). From 
without inward these are as follows:
1. Dura mater.
2. Arachnoid mater.
3. Pia mater.
Fig. 23.6 Ventricles of the brain.
Third ventricle
Cerebral aqueduct
(of Sylvius)
Fourth ventricle
Interventricular
foramen
(of Monro)
Lateral ventricle
Median aperture in the
roof of 4th ventricle
--- Page 374 ---
General Plan and Membranes of the Brain
The dura mater is mesodermal in origin, whereas the 
arachnoid mater and pia mater are ectodermal in origin 
(derived from neural crests).
Dura mater: This has already been described in Chapter 21.
Arachnoid mater: The arachnoid mater is an exceedingly 
thin, a transparent membrane, which invests the brain 
loosely and continues as the spinal arachnoid at the 
foramen magnum, which ends at the level of second sacral 
vertebra. It is closely related to the internal surface of the 
dura mater and has exactly the same shape as the dural sac 
except where its arachnoid granulations pierce the dura 
mater.
The arachnoid mater is separated from the dura mater by 
a capillary space called the subdural space containing a film 
of fluid. This forms a sliding plane where movement is 
possible between the dura mater and brain enclosed in the 
arachnoid and pia mater.
The subdural space is traversed by cerebral veins on their 
route to the dural venous sinuses.
Processes of arachnoid
Arachnoid villi: These are fine finger-like processes which 
arise from the surface of arachnoid. They push the dura 
before them and eventually perforate it to project into the 
dural venous sinuses. They are covered by specialized 
mesothelial cells which convey the CSF to bloodstream, thus 
leading to the absorption of CSF.
Arachnoid 
granulations 
(pacchionian 
bodies): 
With 
advancing age, the arachnoid villi enlarge in size and form 
pedunculated tufts called arachnoid granulations. Some 
consider that these are aggregations of arachnoid villi, 
clumped together, i.e., arach noid granulations are the large 
clusters of arachnoid villi. Arachnoid granulations like 
arachnoid villi are concerned with the absorption of CSF. 
They project into the venous lacunae of the superior sagittal 
sinus.
Pia mater: Pia mater is a thin transparent vascular 
membrane which closely invests the surface of the brain. It is 
adherent to the surface of the brain and follows closely the 
irregularities of its surface.
All the blood vessels to the brain run in the subarachnoid 
space on the surface of the pia mater before entering the 
brain.
In certain situations, the walls of the cavities of the brain 
(ventricles) are very thin and made up of only a single layer 
of its lining epithelium, the ependyma. In these regions, the 
pia mater lying on its external surface invaginates into 
ventricular cavities as a series of vascular tufts of capillaries 
which carry the ependyma before them, thus forming the 
choroid plexuses of the brain. The pial component of 
choroid plexus is termed tela choroidea.
SUBARACHNOID SPACE
The subarachnoid space is the space between the arachnoid 
mater and pia mater. It is filled with CSF which enters it 
from the ventricular system of the brain.
The subarachnoid space is traversed by thread-like 
trabeculae passing from the arachnoid to pia, giving it a 
spider’s-web appearance, hence the name arachnoid 
(arachnoid = like spider’s web), and forms a kind of fluid-
filled sponge. The arteries and veins of the brain lie in this 
space.
Fig. 23.7 Median section of the brain showing membranes and cisterns.
Arachnoid granulations
Subarachnoid space
Lateral ventricle
Third ventricle
Interpeduncular cistern
Cisterna pontis
Fourth ventricle
Dura mater
Arachnoid mater
Pia mater
Interventricular foramen
Superior sagittal sinus
Great cerebral vein
(of Galen)
Cistern of great cerebral vein
(cisterna ambiens)
Cerebello-medullary cistern
Pons
--- Page 375 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
The subarachnoid space around the brain is continuous 
with the subarachnoid space around the spinal cord at the 
foramen magnum and communicates with the ventricular 
system only through the foramina in the roof of the 4th 
ventricle.
The cerebrospinal fluid in the subarachnoid space acts as 
a mobile buffer to distribute and equalize pressures within 
the skull.
SUBARACHNOID CISTERNS
The enlargements of subarachnoid space, in certain situa-
tions, around the brain are termed subarachnoid cisterns.
They contain large amount of CSF forming ‘pools of CSF’.
The cisterns are found where the brain, closely covered with 
pia mater, lies at some distance from the arachnoid lining the 
dura mater. The cisterns act as a water-bed to the brain.
The various types of subarachnoid cisterns are as follows:
1. Cerebellomedullary cistern (cisterna magna): It is the 
largest cistern and formed by the arachnoid, bridging 
the interval between the medulla oblongata and the infe-
rior surface of the cerebellum. Thus, it lies in the triangle 
formed by the cerebellum, the medulla oblongata, and 
the occipital bone. It is directly continuous inferiorly 
with the posterior part of the spinal subarachnoid space.
The cerebellomedullary cistern is easily accessible to a 
needle introduced anterosuperiorly through the poste-
rior atlanto-occipital membrane, between the posterior 
arch of atlas and the posterior margin of the foramen 
magnum. Therefore, it is utilized for cisternal puncture
if lumbar puncture is not possible to withdraw CSF by 
clinicians for therapeutic and diagnostic purposes.
This cistern is triangular in sagittal section. It is the 
only cistern which directly communicates with the ven-
tricular system of the brain through openings (foramen 
of Magendie and foramina of Luschka) in the roof of the 
4th ventricle.
2. Pontine cistern (cisterna pontis): This is an extensive 
subarachnoid space on the ventral surface of the pons 
and contains the basilar artery and its branches. It is 
continuous below with the subarachnoid space of the 
spinal cord, behind with the cerebellomedullary cistern 
and rostrally with the interpeduncular cistern.
3. Interpeduncular cistern (basal cistern): It is formed by 
the arachnoid mater bridging across the two temporal 
lobes on the inferior aspect of the brain and contains the 
circle of Willis (circulus arteriosus).
Interpeduncular cistern is continuous laterally with 
the subarachnoid spaces surrounding the middle and 
posterior cerebral arteries, and anteriorly with the 
subarachnoid spaces around the anterior cerebral arteries.
4. Cistern of lateral sulcus/fossa (sylvian cistern): It lies in 
front of each temporal pole and is formed by the 
arachnoid mater bridging the lateral sulcus. It contains 
the middle cerebral artery.
5. Cistern of great cerebral vein (cisterna superior or 
cisterna ambiens): It occupies the interval between the 
splenium of corpus callosum and the superior surface of 
cerebellum. This cistern contains the great cerebral vein 
of Galen and pineal gland and is widely used as a 
neurosurgical landmark.
N.B. The various cisterns are large pools of CSF and 
communicate freely with each other. The pulsations of 
arteries within CSF help to force the CSF from cisterns onto 
the superolateral surfaces of the cerebral hemispheres and 
then into arachnoid villi and granulations.
CEREBROSPINAL FLUID
Cerebrospinal fluid is somewhat similar to blood plasma 
and interstitial fluid. It is present in the ventricular system 
within the CNS and in the subarachnoid space surrounding 
the CNS. It bathes both the external and internal surfaces of 
the brain and spinal cord and provides a protective cushion 
between the CNS and the surrounding bones.
In an adult, the total volume of CSF is about 150 ml, out 
of which only 30 ml is in the ventricular system and the 
remainder in the subarachnoid space.
Production
About 80–90% of the CSF is produced by the choroid 
plexuses within the lateral ventricles, with remaining being 
produced by the choroid plexuses in the 3rd and 4th 
ventricles. The process of production whether by secretion, 
filtration, or dialyzation is uncertain. The average amount of 
CSF formed per day is about 500 ml.
Circulation and Absorption
The CSF is produced mainly in the lateral ventricles from 
their choroid plexuses, from where it passes through the 
interventricular foramina (of Monro) into the 3rd ventricle, 
and then via cerebral aqueduct into the 4th ventricle. Here 
the fluid escapes via the median aperture (foramen of 
Magendie) and lateral apertures (foramina of Luschka) in 
the roof of the lateral ventricle, into the cerebellomedullary 
and pontine cisterns, respectively. From these sites, the fluid 
flows slowly in the subarachnoid space over the brain and 
spinal cord.
Most of the CSF flows upward through the gap in the 
tentorium cerebelli and then forward, laterally over the 
inferior surface of the cerebrum. Finally, it ascends on the 
superolateral aspect of each cerebral hemisphere to reach the 
arachnoid villi and granulations which penetrate into the 
superior sagittal sinus. The CSF enters into the bloodstream
--- Page 376 ---
General Plan and Membranes of the Brain
of the sinus through the mesothelial cell lining of these villi 
and granulations.
Some of the CSF moves inferiorly in the subarachnoid 
space around the spinal cord and cauda equina. Small 
amount of absorption may also occur into the pial veins.
The flow of CSF is facilitated by the pulsations of cerebral 
and spinal arteries present in the subarachnoid space and the 
movements of the head and spine.
Functions
The CSF performs the following functions:
1. It serves as a cushion between the CNS and the 
surrounding bones.
2. It acts as a shock absorber, i.e., it prevents or diminishes 
the transmission of jarring or shocking forces to the 
CNS.
Hydrocephalus: The hydrocephalus is an abnormal 
increase in the volume of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) within 
the skull.
• Types of hydrocephalus: Two varieties of hydrocephalus 
described: 
non-communicating 
communicating.
Clinical correlation
If the CSF accumulates within the ventricular system, 
the condition is called internal (non-communicating) 
hydrocephalus. It occurs due to blockage at some point 
between its site of formation at the choroid plexuses and 
its site of exit through the foramina in the roof of the 4th 
ventricle.
If the CSF accumulates in the subarachnoid space, the 
condition 
called 
external 
(communicating) 
hydrocephalus, as there is no obstruction within or to the 
outflow from the ventricular system. It commonly occurs 
due to blockage of arachnoid villi and granulations.
• Clinical features of hydrocephalus in infants and children: 
Disproportionately large size of the head (increased skull 
circumference).
– Bossing of the forehead.
– Widely separated cranial sutures.
– Enlarged and tense anterior fontanelle.
– Thin scalp with dilated scalp veins.
– Eyes look downward giving a typical setting-sun 
appearance.
– Cracked-pot sound on skull percussion.
N.B. There is a natural tendency to the arrest of infantile 
hydrocephalus. The renowned scientists Cuvier and 
Helmholtz are examples of arrested hydrocephalus.
--- Page 377 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
Golden Facts to Remember
  Largest part of the brain
Cerebrum
  Second largest part of the brain
Cerebellum
  Most of the CSF is formed by
Choroid plexuses of the lateral ventricles
  Narrowest cavity within the brain
Cerebral aqueduct (aqueduct of Sylvius)
  Main blood vessels of the brain and their principal 
branches lie in the
Subarachnoid space
  Part of the brain which is almost entirely hidden 
from view by the cerebral hemispheres
Diencephalon
  Only communication between the cavities of the 
brain and subarachnoid space around brain is 
through
Three small openings in the roof of the 4th ventricle
A 2-year and 6-month-old boy was taken by his mother 
to a neurologist and complained that the size of head of 
her son is unusually large and his eyes look different 
from other children. On examination, the neurologist 
found enlarged and tense anterior fontanelle, widely 
separated cranial sutures, and typical setting-sun 
appearance of the eyes. He made the diagnosis of 
hydrocephalus.
Questions
1. What is hydrocephalus?
2. Enumerate the openings through which cavities 
within 
brain 
communicate 
with 
subarachnoid space around the brain.
3. What is the difference between internal and 
external hydrocephalus?
Answers
1. Abnormal increase in the volume of cerebrospinal 
fluid (CSF) within the skull.
2. Foramen of Magendie (median aperture) and 
foramina of Luschka (lateral apertures) in the roof 
of the 4th ventricle.
Internal hydrocephalus: Excessive accumulation of 
CSF within the ventricular system of brain.
External hydrocephalus: Excessive accumulation 
of CSF in the subarachnoid space around the brain.
Clinical Case Study
--- Page 378 ---
Brainstem
CHAPTER
The brainstem is the stalk-like part of the brain which con-
nects the forebrain (diencephalon and cerebrum) with the 
spinal cord. It consists, from below upward, of the medulla 
oblongata, pons, and midbrain.
The brainstem consists of nerve fibres and nerve cells. 
Most of the fibres in the brainstem are arranged longitudinally 
in the form of tracts as in the spinal cord. The nerve cells like 
spinal cord do not form a single central mass of grey matter; 
rather most of them are aggregated to form well-defined 
nuclei.
The brainstem nuclei are of the following two types:
1. Nuclei of last 10 cranial nerves (i.e., 3rd–12th cranial 
nerves).
2. Other named nuclei such as red nucleus, substantia 
nigra, pontine nuclei, olivary nuclei, etc.
In addition to well-defined tracts and nuclei, the brainstem 
consists of the diffuse system of cells and fibres called 
reticular formation. Some of the cells of reticular formation 
form vital centres, viz. cardiac, respiratory, vasomotor, etc. 
Although these centres are not anatomically demonstrable, 
they are of great physiological importance.
The external features of the brainstem are shown in 
Figs. 24.1 and 24.2.
MEDULLA OBLONGATA
The medulla oblongata is the direct upward continuation of 
the spinal cord, extending from the foramen magnum to the 
upper border of the pons. It forms the lowest part of the 
brainstem and lies almost vertically in the anterior part of 
the posterior cranial fossa between the clivus (superior 
surface of the basiocciput) in front and the vallecula of the 
cerebellum behind.
Medulla provides attachment to the last four cranial 
nerves.
The lower part of the medulla, like the spinal cord, 
contains the central canal. In the upper part of the medulla, 
this canal widens and moves dorsally to form the lower part 
of the 4th ventricle. Thus, the medulla is divided into two 
parts: a lower closed part of medulla and an upper open 
part.
EXTERNAL FEATURES
The medulla is divided into right and left symmetrical halves 
by the anterior median fissure and posterior median sulcus.
The anterior median fissure is continuous below with the 
corresponding fissure on the spinal cord, and above it ends 
into a small triangular depression called the foramen cecum
Fig. 24.1 External features on the anterior (ventral) aspect 
of the brainstem.
Optic nerve
Optic chiasma
Optic tract
Oculomotor
nerve
Trochlear nerve
Facial
nerve
Motor root
Sensory root
Abducent nerve
Motor root
Sensory root
Vestibulocochlear nerve
Glossopharyngeal
nerve
Vagus nerve roots
Hypoglossal
nerve roots
Accessory nerve
Spinal root of
accessory nerve
Anterior median fissure
Pyramidal
decussation
Olive
Foramen cecum
Pyramid
Medulla
oblongata
Middle
cerebellar
peduncle
Basilar sulcus
Crus cerebri
Mammillary body
Infundibulum
Posterior
perforated
substance
Pons
Anterior external
arcuate fibres
(circumolivary
bundle)
Trigeminal
nerve
--- Page 379 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
at the lower border of the pons. It is interrupted in its lower 
part by the bundles of fibres crossing obliquely from one side 
to the other, the decussation of pyramids.
The posterior median sulcus continues below with the 
corresponding sulcus of the cord and is present only in the 
lower half of the medulla. Above, its lips diverge to form the 
boundaries of a triangular area, the lower part of the floor of 
the 4th ventricle.
Each half of the medulla is marked by two sulci, 
anterolateral and posterolateral, which are direct upward 
continuations of the corresponding sulci of the cord.
The anterolateral sulcus extends along the lateral border 
of the pyramid and along it emerge the rootlets of the 
hypoglossal (12th cranial) nerve.
The posterolateral sulcus lies between the olive and the 
inferior cerebellar peduncle and along it emerge the rootlets 
of the glossopharyngeal (9th), vagus (10th), and cranial root 
of accessory (11th) cranial nerves.
Features on the Ventral Aspect
The ventral aspect of medulla presents the following 
features:
1. Pyramids: These are two elongated elevations, one on 
either side of the anterior median fissure, and are 
produced by the underlying corticospinal (pyramidal) 
fibres.
2. Olives: These are oval elevations, posterolateral to the 
pyramids and are produced by an underlying mass of 
grey matter called inferior olivary nucleus.
3. Rootlets of the hypoglossal nerve: These emerge from 
the anterolateral sulcus between the pyramid and the 
olive.
4. Inferior cerebellar peduncles: These are thick bundles of 
fibres lying posterolateral to the olive, and attach the 
medulla with the cerebellum.
5. Rootlets of the 9th, 10th, and 11th (cranial part) cranial 
nerves: These emerge through the posterolateral sulcus 
separating the olive from the inferior cerebellar pedun-
cle.
Features on the Dorsal Aspect
The dorsal aspect of the medulla is well demarcated into 
lower closed and upper open parts.
Features of the Closed Part
The closed part, on either side of the posterior median 
sulcus, presents three longitudinal elevations. From medial 
to lateral these are: fasciculus gracilis, fasciculus cuneatus, 
and inferior cerebellar peduncle. The upper ends of the 
fasciculus gracilis and fasciculus cuneatus expand to form 
the gracile and cuneate tubercles, respectively, due to 
underlying nuclei of the same name.
Another elevation present lateral to cuneate tubercle; the 
tuber cinereum is produced by the spinal nucleus of the 
trigeminal nerve.
Features of the Open Part
The open part of the medulla forms the lower part of the 
floor of the 4th ventricle which presents a number of features 
such as, median sulcus, hypoglossal and vagal triangles, 
vestibular areas, area postrema, stria medullaris, etc. (for 
details, see floor of the 4th ventricle in Chapter 25, page 379).
INTERNAL STRUCTURE
The internal structure of medulla is well appreciated by 
examining its transverse sections (T.S.) at the following three 
levels:
1. At the level of decussation of pyramids.
2. At the level of sensory decussation.
3. At the level of the olives.
T.S. of Medulla at the Level of Decussation of Pyramids
The transaction at this level passes through the inferior half 
of the medulla, and closely resembles that of the spinal cord. 
However, the following important features are observed at 
this level (Fig. 24.3):
Superior
colliculus
Superior
brachium
Inferior
brachium
Inferior
colliculus
Median
sulcus
Medial
eminence
Sulcus
limitans
Facial colliculus
Striae medullaris
Taenia
Cuneate tubercle
Gracile tubercle
Vagal triangle
Posterior median sulcus
Hypoglossal
triangle
Vestibular area
Inferior cerebellar
peduncle
Middle cerebellar
peduncle
Superior cerebellar
peduncle
Superior
medullary velum
Frenulum veli
Trochlear nerve
Crus cerebri
Thalamic pulvinar
Pineal gland
Fig. 24.2 External features on the posterior (dorsal) aspect 
of the brainstem.
--- Page 380 ---
Brainstem
1. The nucleus gracilis and nucleus cuneatus appear as 
narrow strip-like projections from the posterior aspect 
of the central grey matter.
2. The apex of posterior horn swells up to form the nucleus 
of the spinal tract of the trigeminal nerve.
3. The spinal tract of the trigeminal nerve is a bundle of 
fibres, which caps the nucleus of the spinal tract of the 
trigeminal nerve.
4. Decussation of pyramidal tracts forms the most 
important feature of medulla at this level. About 75% 
fibres of pyramidal tract run backward and laterally 
across the midline to reach the lateral white column of 
the opposite side of the spinal cord where they run 
downward as the lateral corticospinal tract. In doing so, 
the anterior horns are detached from the central grey 
matter.
5. Each detached anterior horn divides to form the spinal
nucleus of the accessory nerve and the supraspinal 
nucleus of the 1st cervical nerve.
6. Diffuse zone appears containing a network of fibres and 
scattered nerve cells within it, in the lateral white column 
adjacent to the nucleus of the spinal tract of the 
trigeminal nerve is called reticular formation.
T.S. of Medulla at the Level of Sensory Decussation
This section passes through the middle of medulla and 
displays the following features (Fig. 24.4):
1. The nucleus gracilis and nucleus cuneatus become more 
pronounced and are separated from the central grey 
matter. The fibres of fasciculus gracilis and fasciculus 
cuneatus terminate in these nuclei.
2. The internal arcuate fibres arising from gracile and 
cuneate nuclei course forward and medially around the 
central grey matter and decussate with corresponding 
fibres of opposite side in the median plane (sensory 
decussation) and then turn upward to ascend as the 
medial lemniscus on the opposite side close to the median 
plane.
3. The internal arcuate fibres cut off the spinal nucleus 
and tract of the trigeminal nerve from the central grey 
matter.
4. Immediately dorsolateral to the cuneate nucleus lies the 
accessory cuneate nucleus which receives the more 
lateral fibres (derived from the cervical segments of the 
cord) of the fasciculus cuneatus and gives rise to 
posterior 
external 
arcuate 
fibres 
conveying 
proprioceptive impulses to the cerebellum of the same 
side through inferior cerebellar peduncle.
5. The separated spinal nucleus and tract of trigeminal 
nerve lies ventrolateral to the cuneate nucleus.
6. The lower part of inferior olivary nucleus is seen.
7. The pyramids lie on either side of the anterior median 
fissure.
8. The central grey matter contains the: (a) hypoglossal 
nucleus, (b) dorsal nucleus of vagus, and (c) nucleus of 
tractus solitarius.
9. The medial longitudinal bundle/fasciculus fasciculus 
lies posterior to the medial lemniscus. It is a small 
compact tract of nerve fibres which interconnect the 
3rd, 4th, 6th, 8th, and spinal nucleus of the 11th cranial 
nerve nuclei.
10. Spinocerebellar and lateral spinothalamic tracts lie in 
the anterolateral area of lateral white column.
11. Lateral and anterior spinothalamic tracts are very close 
to each other and collectively form spinal lemniscus.
Fig. 24.3 Transverse section of medulla at the level of 
pyramidal decussation.
Fasciculus gracilis
Nucleus gracilis
Fasciculus cuneatus
Nucleus cuneatus
Spinal nucleus
Trigeminal
nerve
Spinal tract
Lateral corticospinal tract
Posterior spinocerebellar tract
Spinal lemniscus
Spinal nucleus of accessory nerve
Anterior spinocerebellar tract
Decussation
of pyramids
Pyramid
Nucleus gracilis
Nucleus cuneatus
Accessory cuneate nucleus
Spinal nucleus
and tract of
trigeminal nerve
Internal
arcuate fibres
Inferior olivary
nucleus
Medial lemniscus
Sensory decussation
Fig. 24.4 Transverse section of medulla at the level of 
sensory decussation (1 = nucleus tractus solitarius, 2 = dorsal 
nucleus of vagus, 3  = hypoglossal nucleus; M  = medial 
longitudinal fasciculus, R = reticular formation).
--- Page 381 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
T.S. of Medulla at the Level of Olives
Transverse section passes across the floor of the 4th ventricle 
and through the middle of olives and presents the following 
features (Fig. 24.5):
Medulla at the level of olives: Transverse section passes 
across the floor of the 4th ventricle and through the middle 
of olives and presents the following features (Fig. 24.5):
1. The central grey matter is spread over the floor of the 
4th ventricle and contains the nuclei of several cranial 
nerves. From medial to lateral, these are: hypoglossal 
nucleus, nucleus intercalatus, dorsal nucleus of vagus, 
and vestibular nuclei (inferior and medial).
2. The nucleus of tractus solitarius lies ventral to vestibu-
lar nuclei.
3. The nucleus ambiguus lies deep within the reticular 
formation and gives origin to the motor fibres of 9th, 
10th, and 11th cranial nerves.
4. On either side of the midline (paramedian region) from 
dorsal to ventral lie medial longitudinal fasciculus 
(MLF), tectospinal, medial lemniscus, and pyramidal 
(corticospinal) tracts.
5. The arcuate nuclei, thought to be inferiorly displaced 
pontine nuclei, are situated on the anteromedial aspect 
of the pyramids.
6. Laterally, from dorsal to ventral lie two prominent 
structures: (a) inferior cerebellar peduncle and
(b) inferior olivary nucleus.
The inferior cerebellar peduncle occupies posterolat-
eral part.
The inferior olivary nucleus is the largest mass of 
grey matter, and forms the most prominent feature 
in the section through the upper part of medulla. It 
presents crumpled bag-like appearances. Close to 
the main nucleus lies medial and dorsal accessory 
olivary nuclei.
N.B. Transverse section of medulla just inferior to the pons 
presents the same features as those seen in the transverse 
section of medulla at the level of the olives, except that:
– The lateral vestibular nucleus replaces the inferior 
vestibular nucleus.
– The cochlear nuclei are now visible. The dorsal and 
ventral cochlear nuclei lie on the dorsolateral and 
ventrolateral aspects of the inferior cerebellar peduncle, 
respectively.
ARTERIAL SUPPLY OF THE MEDULLA
The medulla is supplied by the following arteries:
1. Two vertebral arteries.
2. Anterior and posterior spinal arteries.
3. Anterior and posterior inferior cerebellar arteries.
4. Basilar artery.
• Lateral medullary (posterior inferior cerebellar 
artery) syndrome of Wallenberg: It occurs due to 
thrombosis the of posterior inferior cerebellar artery, thus 
affecting a wedge-shaped area on the dorsolateral 
aspect of the medulla and the inferior surface of the 
cerebellum, and produces the following main signs and 
symptoms:
– Contralateral loss of pain and temperature sensation in 
the trunk and limbs, due to involvement of spinothalamic 
tract.
– Ipsilateral loss of pain and temperature sensation over 
the face, due to involvement of the spinal nucleus and 
tract of the trigeminal nerve.
– Ipsilateral paralysis of muscles of palate, pharynx, and 
larynx, due to involvement of nucleus ambiguus.
– Ipsilateral ataxia, due to involvement of inferior cerebel-
lar peduncle and cerebellum.
– Giddiness, due to involvement of vestibular nuclei.
• Medial medullary syndrome: It occurs due to 
involvement of the paramedian region of the medulla 
following damage to penetrating branches of the anterior 
spinal branch of the vertebral artery. It produces the 
following signs and symptoms:
– Contralateral hemiplegia/paralysis of arm and leg, due 
to damage of pyramid.
– Ipsilateral paralysis and atrophy of the half of the 
tongue, due to damage of hypoglossal nerve.
– Contralateral loss of position and vibration sense due 
to damage of medial lemniscus.
Clinical correlation
Nucleus of
tractus solitarius
Hypoglossal nucleus
Nucleus ambiguus
Inferior olivary nucleus
Inferior cerebellar peduncle
Spinal nucleus and tract
of trigeminal nerve
Vagus nerve
Hypoglossal nerve
Medial lemniscus
Arcuate nucleus
Dorsal nucleus of vagus
Vestibular nuclei
Fig. 24.5 Transverse section of medulla at the level of olives 
(M  = medial longitudinal bundle, R  = reticular formation, 
T = tectospinal tract).
--- Page 382 ---
Brainstem
PONS
The pons is a bulky broad transverse mass of the brainstem 
between the midbrain and medulla.
On either side, the pons is continuous as the middle 
cerebellar peduncle, thus forming a bridge between the two 
cerebellar 
hemispheres, 
hence 
name 
pons 
pons = bridge).
EXTERNAL FEATURES
The pons has two surfaces: ventral and dorsal, and two 
borders: superior and inferior.
Features on the Ventral Aspect
The ventral surface of pons is convex in both the directions, 
i.e., from before backward and from side to side. It is 
transversely striated due to underlying pontocerebellar 
fibres.
In the median plane, it presents a vertical groove, the 
basilar groove which lodges the basilar artery.
The trigeminal nerve is attached to this surface by two 
roots: a small motor and a large sensory root (the motor root 
lies medial to the sensory root).
Rostrally, the junction between the midbrain and pons is 
marked by cerebral peduncles and the intervening interpe-
duncular fossa; caudally the pontomedullary junction is 
marked by a shallow groove. In this groove, from medial to 
lateral, the abducent (6th), facial (7th), and vestibulococh-
lear (8th) nerves emerge.
The superior cerebellar arteries curve along the superior 
border, intervening between the oculomotor and trochlear 
nerves. The anterior inferior cerebellar arteries curve round 
the inferior border.
Features on the Dorsal Aspect
The dorsal surface of the pons is covered by the cerebellum, 
and separated from it by the cavity of the 4th ventricle. The 
dorsal surface of the pons is triangular and forms the upper 
part of the floor of the 4th ventricle. For details of features 
on the dorsal surface of pons, see the floor of the 4th ventricle 
described in detail in Chapter 25.
INTERNAL STRUCTURE
A cross section at any level of pons shows two distinct 
regions:
1. A large ventral or basilar part.
2. A small dorsal or tegmental part.
The ventral or basilar part is continuous inferiorly with the 
pyramids of the medulla and on each side with the middle 
cerebellar peduncle.
The dorsal or tegmental part is a direct upward 
continuation of the medulla excluding the pyramids.
The structure of basilar part is the same at all levels of pons, 
but the structure of tegmental part varies considerably in the 
upper and lower parts of the pons.
Basilar part
Basilar part is composed of the longitudinal bundles of 
fibres, the transverse fibres, and the pontine nuclei:
1. Longitudinal bundles of fibres include corticopontine, 
corticonuclear, and corticospinal fibres.
(a) The corticopontine fibres relay in the ipsilateral 
pontine nuclei.
(b) The 
corticonuclear 
fibres 
terminate 
contralateral (and to some extent ipsilateral) motor 
nuclei of the cranial nerves.
(c) The corticospinal fibres converge toward the lower 
part of the pons and form the pyramids of the 
medulla.
2. Transverse fibres arise in the pontine nuclei and cross to 
the opposite side to form the middle cerebellar peduncle. 
These are pontocerebellar fibres.
3. Pontine nuclei are scattered among the longitudinal and 
transverse fibres.
Tegmental part
Tegmental part is traversed by a number of ascending and 
descending tracts and contains a decussation of transversely 
running fibres, the trapezoid body. It also contains the nuclei 
of trigeminal (5th), abducent (6th), facial (7th), and 
vestibulocochlear (8th) nerves.
Since the structure of tegmentum differs in the lower 
(caudal) and upper (cranial) parts of the pons, it is studied 
by examining transverse sections at these two levels.
T.S. Through Lower Part of the Pons
Transverse section through the lower part of the pons passes 
through the facial colliculi (Fig. 24.6).
The tegmentum at this level presents the following 
features:
Grey Matter
The grey matter at this level comprises:
1. The abducent nerve nucleus lying beneath the facial 
colliculus in the floor of the 4th ventricle.
2. The motor nucleus of the facial nerve lying ventrolateral 
to the abducent nucleus. The fibres of the facial nerve 
first wind round the abducent nucleus, producing the 
facial colliculus, then pass anteriorly between the facial 
nucleus and the nucleus of the spinal tract of the 
trigeminal nerve.
3. The superior salivatory, inferior salivatory, and 
lacrimatory nuclei lying medial to the motor nucleus of 
the facial nerve.
--- Page 383 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
4. The nucleus of tractus solitarius lying lateral to the 
superior salivatory nucleus.
5. The vestibular nuclei lying beneath the vestibular area 
in the floor of the 4th ventricle.
6. The dorsal and ventral cochlear nuclei situated dorsal 
and ventral to the inferior cerebellar peduncle, 
respectively.
7. The spinal nucleus of the trigeminal nerve and its tract
located on the anteromedial aspect of the inferior 
cerebellar peduncle.
White Matter
The white matter at this level comprises:
1. The trapezoid body that is a trapezium-shaped mass 
of white fibres lying in the anterior part of the 
tegmentum, just posterior to the basilar part of the 
pons. It is formed by the decussation of transversely 
running fibres arising from the cochlear nuclei of 
both the sides.
2. The medial lemniscus situated in the most anterior part 
of the tegmentum with its long axis running transversely.
3. The spinal lemniscus lying lateral to the medial 
lemniscus and occupying the same peripheral position 
as in the medulla.
4. The medial longitudinal bundle occupying a paramed-
ian position in the most posterior part.
5. The tectospinal tracts located ventral to the medial 
longitudinal bundles.
6. The spinal tract of the trigeminal nerve lying lateral and 
dorsal to the motor nucleus of the facial nerve.
T.S. Through Upper Part of the Pons (Fig. 24.7)
Transverse section through the upper part of the pons passes 
through the trigeminal nuclei.
The tegmentum at this level presents the following 
features:
Grey Matter
The grey matter at this level comprises:
1. The motor nucleus of trigeminal nerve situated in the 
dorsolateral part, beneath the lateral part of the 4th 
ventricle. The emerging motor fibres travel anteriorly 
through the substance of the pons and exit on its anterior 
surface.
2. The principal (main) sensory nucleus of the trigeminal 
nerve situated lateral to the motor nucleus.
White Matter
The white matter at this level consists of the same ascending 
tracts as in the lower part. However, the lateral lemniscus is 
well formed here. The spinal lemniscus lies between the 
medial and lateral lemnisci.
The trigeminal lemniscus consisting of trigeminotha-
lamic fibres is also seen between medial lemniscus and spinal 
lemniscus.
N.B. The ventral part of tegmentum, immediately posterior 
to the basilar part, presents four lemnisci. From the medial 
to lateral side, these are: medial lemniscus, trigeminal 
lemniscus, spinal lemniscus, and lateral lemniscus.
Fig. 24.6 Transverse section through the lower part of the 
pons (M = medial longitudinal bundle, R = rubrospinal tract, 
T = tectospinal tract).
Trapezoid body
Abducent nerve
Longitudinal bundles of cortico-
nuclear and corticospinal fibres
Pontine nuclei
Facial nerve
Medial lemniscus
Spinal lemniscus
Spinal nucleus and
tract of 5th nerve
Ventral cochlear
nucleus
Inferior cerebellar
peduncle
Dorsal cochlear nucleus
Vestibular nuclei
Abducent nucleus
Facial colliculus
Medial
Trigeminal
Spinal
Lateral
Lemnisci
Trigeminal nerve
Middle cerebellar
peduncle
Main sensory nucleus
of trigeminal nerve
Mesencephalic root
of 5th nerve
Motor nucleus of
trigeminal nerve
Superior cerebellar
peduncle
ventricle
Trapezoid
body
Fig. 24.7 Transverse section through the upper part of the 
pons (M = medial longitudinal bundle, R = rubrospinal tract, 
T = tectospinal tract).
--- Page 384 ---
Brainstem
ARTERIAL SUPPLY
The pons is supplied by the following arteries:
1. Numerous (pontine) branches from the basilar artery.
2. Anterior inferior cerebellar artery.
Millard–Gubler syndrome: It results from a lesion in the 
lower part of the pons which is so placed that it includes the 
pyramidal tract and the emerging fibres of the abducent and 
facial nerves.
The characteristic features of this syndrome are as follows:
• Ipsilateral medial squint due to involvement of the 
abducent nerve.
• Ipsilateral facial palsy, due to involvement of facial nerve 
fibres.
• Contralateral hemiplegia, due to involvement of the 
corticospinal tract.
Clinical correlation
MIDBRAIN
The midbrain is the shortest segment of the brainstem. It 
connects the pons to the diencephalon and cerebrum. Its 
cavity, the cerebral aqueduct (aqueduct of Sylvius) connects 
the 3rd ventricle with the 4th ventricle.
EXTERNAL FEATURES
Features on the Ventral Aspect
The ventral surface of the midbrain presents two crura 
cerebri which emerge from the cerebral hemispheres and 
converge downward to enter the pons forming the 
posterolateral boundaries of the interpeduncular fossa.
The superficial surface of the crus cerebri is finely 
corrugated by the underlying longitudinal fibres.
The oculomotor nerve emerges on either side from a 
groove on the medial side of the crus cerebri.
Features on the Dorsal Aspect
The dorsal surface of the midbrain presents four rounded 
elevations: two superior and two inferior colliculi (or corpora 
quadrigemina). The colliculi are separated from each other 
by a cruciform sulcus. The vertical limb of sulcus when 
traced above, forms a surface depression which lodges the
pineal body and when traced below, it becomes continuous 
with the frenulum veli (a median ridge on the dorsal surface 
of superior medullary velum).
The trochlear nerves emerge one on each side of the upper 
part of frenulum veli after decussation in the superior 
medullary velum. Thick ridges of white matter extending 
from the lateral side of each colliculus constitute their 
brachia.
The superior brachium connects the superior colliculus 
to the lateral geniculate body and the optic tract and is made 
up of optic tract fibres. The inferior brachium connects the 
inferior colliculus to the medial geniculate body, and is made 
up of auditory fibres.
INTERNAL STRUCTURE
The internal structure of the midbrain is studied conveni-
ently by examining its transverse sections. The transverse 
section of the midbrain shows a tiny canal, called cerebral 
aqueduct. A coronal plane passing through the aqueduct 
divides the midbrain into two parts: a small posterior part 
and a large anterior part.
The small posterior part is called tectum and consists of 
four colliculi. The large anterior part is divided into two 
equal right and left halves, the cerebral peduncles by a 
vertical plane. Each cerebral peduncle is further subdivided 
into three parts; from dorsal to ventral, these are: 
(a) tegmentum, (b) substantia nigra, and (c) crus cerebri.
The structures in the tectum and tegmentum vary at 
different levels of the midbrain, but those of the crus cerebri 
and substantia nigra are nearly the same throughout the 
length of the midbrain.
Crus Cerebri (Basis Pedunculi)
The crus cerebri is the part of the cerebral peduncle situated 
anterolateral to substantia nigra. It contains important 
descending tracts which connect the cerebral cortex to the 
anterior horn cells of the spinal cord, cranial nerve nuclei, 
and pontine nuclei.
Substantia Nigra
The substantia nigra is a curved (crescent shaped) pigmented 
band of grey matter (thicker medially than laterally) situated 
between tegmentum and crus cerebri. Its concavity is smooth 
and directed toward the tegmentum.
The substantia nigra is made up of deeply pigmented 
nerve cells which contain melanin (a polymerized form of 
dopamine) and iron.
The structure of tectum and tegmentum vary at different 
levels; therefore, it is again best studied by examining the T.S. 
of the midbrain at the following two levels: (a) at the level of 
the inferior colliculi, and (b) at the level of superior colliculi.
T.S. of Midbrain at the Level of Inferior Colliculi
The grey and white matter at this level present the following 
features (Fig. 24.8):
Grey Matter
1. The central grey matter (grey matter around the cerebral 
aqueduct) contains two nuclei: (a) the nucleus of the
--- Page 385 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
trochlear nerve, and (b) the mesencephalic nucleus of 
the trigeminal nerve.
The trochlear nerve nucleus is situated close to the 
median plane just posterior to the MLF. The 
emerging fibres of the trochlear nerve pass laterally 
and posteriorly around the central grey matter and 
leave the midbrain just below the inferior colliculi. 
The fibres of the trochlear nerve now decussate in 
the superior medullary vellum before emerging on 
the surface.
The mesencephalic nucleus of the trigeminal nerve
lies in the lateral edge of the central grey matter.
2. An ovoid mass of grey matter underneath the inferior 
colliculus forms the nucleus of inferior colliculus.
White Matter
1. The decussation of the superior cerebellar peduncles
occupies the central part of the tegmentum and forms 
the most important feature in the lower part of the mid-
brain.
2. The lemnisci are arranged in the form of a curved 
compact band of white fibres in the ventrolateral part of 
the tegmentum, lateral to cerebellar decussation and 
dorsal to the substantia nigra. From medial to lateral 
side, these are: medial lemniscus, trigeminal lemniscus, 
spinal lemniscus, and lateral lemniscus.
3. The MLF lies on the side of the median plane ventral to 
the trochlear nerve nucleus.
T.S. of Midbrain at the Level of Superior Colliculi
The grey and white matter in the midbrain at this level 
present the following features (Fig. 24.9):
Grey Matter
1. The central grey matter in each half contains two nuclei: 
the oculomotor nerve nucleus and the mesencephalic 
nucleus.
The oculomotor nucleus lies in the ventromedial 
part. The nuclei of two sides fuse together forming a 
single complex having a triangular outline. The 
emerging fibres of oculomotor nerve pass ventrally 
through the tegmentum, intersecting red nucleus 
and medial part of the substantia nigra and emerge 
in the posterior part of the interpeduncular fossa 
through the sulcus on the medial aspect of crus 
cerebri.
The mesencephalic nucleus occupies the same 
position as in the lower part of the midbrain.
2. The nucleus of superior colliculus consists of cells which 
are involved in general light reflexes.
3. Pretectal nucleus is a small group of nerve cells and lies 
deep to the superolateral part of the superior colliculus.
4. Red nucleus is a cigar-shaped mass of grey matter which 
appears ovoid in cross section. It is about 0.5 cm in 
diameter. It is situated in the tegmentum, ventral to the 
3rd nerve nucleus and dorsomedial to the substantia 
nigra. It is an important nucleus of the extrapyramidal 
system.
White Matter
1. Decussation of fibres (tectospinal and tectobulbar 
tracts) arising from superior colliculi forming dorsal
tegmental decussation (of Meynert).
Fig. 24.8 Transverse section of the midbrain at the level of 
inferior colliculi (M = medial longitudinal bundle, R = rubro-
spinal tract, T = tectospinal tract).
Lateral
Spinal
Trigeminal
Medial
Lemnisci
Trochlear nerve
Nucleus of inferior colliculus
Temporopontine,
parietopontine and
occipitopontine
fibres
Trochlear
nucleus
Mesencephalic
nucleus
Corticospinal and
corticonuclear fibres
Frontopontine fibres
Decussation of superior
cerebellar peduncles
Substantia nigra
Fig. 24.9 Transverse section of the midbrain at the level of 
superior colliculi.
Mesencephalic nucleus
Nucleus of superior
colliculus
Pretectal nucleus
Spinal
Trigeminal
Medial
Red nucleus
Ventral
tegmental
decussation
(of Forel)
Oculomotor nerve
Dorsal
tegmental
decussation
(of Meynert)
Medial
longitudinal
bundle
Oculomotor
nucleus
Lemnisci
Substantia nigra
--- Page 386 ---
Brainstem
2. Decussation of fibres (rubrospinal tracts) arising from 
red nuclei forming ventral tegmental decussation (of 
Forel).
3. Medial longitudinal fasciculus lying ventrolateral to the 
oculomotor nucleus.
Tegmentum at this level also containing the same lemnisci 
(i.e., medial, trigeminal, and spinal) as those at the level of 
inferior colliculus except for the lateral lemniscus.
5. Emerging fibres of the oculomotor nerve.
Medial Longitudinal Fasciculus 
Medial longitudinal fasciculus is a heavily myelinated 
composite tract found in the paramedian plane of the brainstem.
The fibres of MLF interconnect the nuclei of the 3rd, 4th, 
6th, and 8th cranial nerves and the spinal nucleus of the 
accessory nerve.
The chief function of MLF is to coordinate the movements of 
eyes, head, and neck in response to stimulation of the vestibulo-
cochlear nerve.
ARTERIAL SUPPLY
The midbrain is supplied by the f ollowing arteries:
1. Basilar artery through its posterior cerebral and superior 
cerebellar arteries. Basilar artery also supplies the 
midbrain through direct branches.
2. Branches of posterior communicating and anterior 
choroidal arteries.
• Weber’s syndrome: This syndrome is produced by a vas-
cular lesion in the basal region of the cerebral peduncle 
due to occlusion of a branch of the posterior cerebral 
artery. This lesion involves the oculomotor nerve and the 
crus cerebri.
The characteristic features of this syndrome are as 
follows:
– Ipsilateral lateral squint, due to involvement of the 3rd 
cranial nerve.
– Contralateral hemiplegia, due to involvement of 
corticospinal tract in the crus cerebri.
• Benedikt’s syndrome: It occurs due to the vascular 
ischemia of the tegmentum of the midbrain, involving 
medial lemniscus, spinal lemniscus, red nucleus, superior 
cerebellar peduncle, and fibres of the oculomotor nerve. It 
is characterized by the following signs and symptoms:
– Ipsilateral lateral squint and ptosis, due to involvement 
of oculomotor nerve fibres.
– Contralateral loss of pain and temperature sensation, 
due to involvement of trigeminal and spinal lemnisci.
– Contralateral loss of tactile, muscle, joint, and vibration 
sense, due to involvement of medial lemniscus.
– Contralateral tremors and involuntary movements in the 
limbs, due to involvement of the red nucleus and fibres 
of superior cerebellar peduncle entering into it.
Clinical correlation
• Perinaud’s syndrome: It results from a lesion of the 
superior colliculi which occurs when this area becomes 
compressed by the tumors of the pineal gland. It is 
characterized by the loss of upward gaze without affecting 
the other eye movements.
DEVELOPMENT OF FUNCTIONAL
COLUMNS AND NUCLEI
The brain and spinal cord develop from the neural tube. The 
cranial end of the neural tube forms the brain, while the 
caudal end forms the spinal cord.
The nerve cells in the wall of the neural tube arrange 
themselves into functional groups.
FUNCTIONAL GROUPS/COLUMNS OF CELLS IN THE 
SPINAL CORD
In cross section, the central canal projects laterally into a 
groove on the inner wall of the spinal cord as sulcus limitans
and divides the wall of the spinal cord on each side into two 
parts: dorsal and ventral laminae. The dorsal and ventral 
laminae are also frequently termed alar and basal laminae,
respectively.
The alar lamina consists of sensory cells and basal lamina 
consists of motor cells. The cells in each lamina are arranged 
into two columns: the one near the sulcus limitans, concerned 
with the innervation of viscera, is called the visceral column
and the one away from sulcus limitans, concerned with 
innervation of somatic structures, is called the somatic 
column.
Thus, there are four functional columns on either side in 
the lateral wall of the spinal cord (Fig. 24.10): two sensory 
columns in the alar lamina and two motor columns in the 
basal lamina, namely
1. General somatic afferent.
2. General visceral afferent.
3. General somatic efferent.
4. General visceral efferent.
Fig. 24.10 Functional columns in the lateral wall of the 
spinal cord.
General visceral afferent
General visceral efferent
General somatic afferent
General somatic efferent
Sulcus
limitans
--- Page 387 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
FUNCTIONAL COLUMNS AND NUCLEI IN THE 
BRAINSTEM
There is a similar arrangement in the brainstem, but here a 
third type of cell column appears in each lamina between the 
visceral and somatic column to innervate the derivatives of 
pharyngeal arches. This column is termed the special visceral 
column.
Apart from this, an extra special somatic column appears 
in the most lateral part of the alar lamina to innervate the 
vestibular and cochlear apparatuses. Thus, there are seven 
functional columns in the brainstem: four in the alar lamina 
and three in the basal lamina (Fig. 24.11), namely
1. Special somatic afferent (SSA).
2. General somatic afferent (GSA).
3. Special visceral afferent (SVA).
4. General visceral afferent (GVA).
5. General somatic efferent (GSE).
6. Special visceral efferent (SVE).
7. General visceral efferent (GVE).
As the development proceeds, each column differentiates 
into two or more discrete cranial nerve nuclei (Table 24.1).
RETICULAR FORMATION
The reticular formation is a diffuse ill-defined mass of nerve 
cell clusters and interlacing nerve fibres occupying the entire 
core of the brainstem.
Phylogenetically, it represents the old reticular core of the 
brain and contains within it the ‘vital centres’.
Reticular formation extends cranially to the diencephalon 
and caudally to the spinal cord.
The reticular formation receives data from most of the 
sensory systems of the body and relay them to all the levels of 
the neuraxis. It is important for the maintenance of sleep–
wake cycle, level of consciousness, and alertness or mutism.
Although reticular formation is described as a network of 
nerve fibres intermingled with nerve cells, on careful 
examination it reveals fairly localized cell groups called 
reticular nuclei in certain regions.
The reticular pathways are polysynaptic, both ascending 
and descending, and crossed and uncrossed. As a result, 
unilateral stimulation produces bilateral responses.
FUNCTIONAL COMPONENTS OF 
RETICULAR FORMATION
Functionally, the reticular formation is divided into sub-
groups, viz.
1. Ascending reticular activating system (ARAS).
2. Descending reticular system (DRS).
Fig. 24.11 Functional columns in the brainstem.
General visceral afferent
Special visceral afferent 
General somatic afferent
Special somatic afferent
General visceral efferent
Special visceral efferent
General somatic efferent
Table 24.1 Cranial nerve nuclei derived from various functional columns in the brainstem
GSE column
SVE column
GVE column
GVA/SVA column
GSA column
SSA column
Oculomotor 
nucleus
Motor nucleus of the 
trigeminal nerve
Edinger–Westphal 
nucleus
Nucleus of the solitary 
tract (nucleus tractus 
solitarius)
Sensory nuclei of the 
trigeminal nerve
1. Chief
2. Mesencephalic
3. Spinal
Vestibular 
nuclei
Trochlear 
nucleus
Motor nucleus of the 
facial nerve
Lacrimatory nucleus
Cochlear nuclei
Abducent 
nucleus
Superior salivatory 
nucleus
Hypoglossal 
nucleus
Nucleus ambiguus
Inferior salivatory 
nucleus
Dorsal nucleus of the 
vagus nerve
--- Page 388 ---
Brainstem
The ARAS is believed to be responsible for the maintenance 
of alertness and consciousness of the brain. It is generally 
termed simply a reticular activity system (RAS) by 
clinicians.
The DRS consists of descending pathways to autonomic 
centres of the brainstem and plays a critical role in regulating 
the functions of the vital centres, viz. respiratory centre, 
cardiac centre, and vasomotor centre.
The visual and acoustic stimuli can stimulate the reticular 
activating system and thus maintain alertness and attention.
For this reason, the stimuli such as sound of ringing alarm 
clock or sudden bright light can arouse consciousness. The 
sleep is thought to occur due to decrease in the activity of 
RAS. A coma is a state of unconsciousness due to the 
inactivity of RAS.
Clinical correlation
--- Page 389 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
Golden Facts to Remember
  Most important part of the brain for survival
Medulla oblongata
  All the cranial nerves arise from the brainstem 
except
Olfactory and optic
  Shortest segment of the brainstem
Midbrain
  All the nuclei of the last four cranial nerves are 
located in the medulla oblongata except
Nucleus of spinal part of the accessory (11th) nerve 
which is located in the upper five cervical spinal 
segments
  Most prominent feature in the transverse section 
of the midbrain at the level of superior Colliculi
Presence of red nuclei
  Largest segment of the brainstem
Pons
  All the cranial nerves arise from the ventral aspect 
of the brain except
Trochlear nerve which arises from the dorsal aspect 
of the brain
  Nuclei of brainstem which functionally belong to 
basal nuclei
Substantia nigra, red nucleus
  Most important centres present in the reticular 
formation
Vital centres (respiratory, cardiac, vasomotor)
A 55-year-old man went to his family physician and 
complained that for the past few days he has been 
having difficulty in walking. He also noted that when 
he walks, his left arm remains flexed and his left leg 
remains extended. Further, he has to swing his left 
lower limb outward to avoid dragging the foot on the 
ground. His family physician referred him to the 
neurologist.
On examination, the neurologist found: (i) no signs 
of facial palsy, (ii) deviation of tongue to the right side 
on protrusion, (iii) atrophy of tongue on the right side, 
and (iv) loss of position and vibration sense on the left 
side. A diagnosis of right-sided medial medullary 
syndrome was made.
Questions
1. Name the area of medulla involved in medial med-
ullary syndrome.
2. What is the commonest cause of this syndrome?
3. Mention the cause of weakness of left arm and left 
leg (left-sided hemiplegia).
4. What is the cause of loss of position and vibration 
sense on the left side?
Answers
1. Paramedian region.
2. Occlusion of anterior spinal artery.
3. Destruction of right pyramid.
4. Destruction of medial lemniscus on the right side.
Clinical Case Study
--- Page 390 ---
Cerebellum and
Fourth Ventricle
CHAPTER
CEREBELLUM
The cerebellum (L. cerebellum = little brain) is the largest 
part of the hindbrain and the second largest part of the brain 
as a whole. It weighs about 150 g. It is located in the posterior 
cranial fossa underneath the tentorium cerebelli and behind 
the pons and medulla oblongata. It is separated from the 
pons and medulla by the cavity of the 4th ventricle (Fig. 25.1). 
Its surface is indented by numerous fine slit-like sulci called
fissures. Between the fissures lie more or less parallel folds 
called folia. In general, the fissures and folia of the cerebellum 
lie transversely from side-to-side across the whole extent of 
the cerebellum.
The cerebellum consists of two hemispheres united in the 
midline by the vermis.
Each hemisphere of the cerebellum is connected to three 
parts of the brainstem by three pairs of the large fibre tracts 
called cerebellar peduncles.
The basic functions of the cerebellum are as follows:
1. Maintenance of equilibrium.
2. Regulation of muscle tone.
3. Coordination of somatic motor activities.
The cerebellar disease is manifested by motor disturbances, 
including inability to stand upright, staggering gait, hypo-
tonia, and failure of coordination.
EXTERNAL FEATURES
The external features of the cerebellum comprise three parts: 
two surfaces, two notches, and three well-marked fissures 
(Fig. 25.2).
Parts
The cerebellum consists of three parts: two large lateral 
hemispherical lobes, the cerebellar hemispheres, and a narrow 
Fig. 25.1 Sagittal section through the brainstem and 
cerebellum. The arrow is in the median aperture of the 4th 
ventricle.
4th ventricle
Cerebellum
Folia
Fissures
Midbrain
Medulla
Pons
Fig. 25.2 Superior view of the cerebellum. Note the fissures 
and folia on the surface of the cerebellum.
Posterior cerebellar notch
Horizontal
fissure
Fissura prima
Medulla and pons occupying
anterior cerebellar notch
Vermis
Cerebellar
hemisphere
--- Page 391 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
median worm-like portion, called vermis. The superior and 
inferior aspects of vermis are termed superior and inferior 
vermis, respectively. The ridge-like superior vermis is 
continuous on either side with the superior surface of cerebellar 
hemisphere imperceptively. The inferior vermis is more clearly 
demarcated from the hemispheres in the floor of vallecula
cerebelli.
Surfaces
The superior surface of the cerebellum is convex. The two 
cerebellar hemispheres are continuous with each other on this 
surface. The inferior surface presents a deep median notch 
called vallecula which separates the two cerebellar hemispheres. 
The floor of the vallecula is formed by the inferior vermis 
and is limited on each side by sulcus valleculae (Fig. 25.4).
Notches
The anterior aspect of cerebellum is marked by a wide shallow 
anterior cerebellar notch which accommodates pons and 
medulla. The posterior cerebellar notch is deep and narrow, 
and lodges the falx cerebelli.
Fissures
1. The horizontal fissure is most conspicuous and runs 
along the lateral and posterior margins of the 
cerebellum. It marks the junction between the superior 
and inferior surfaces of the cerebellum.
2. The posterolateral fissure lies on the inferior surface of the 
cerebellum and separates the flocculonodular lobe from 
the rest of the cerebellum (corpus cerebelli).
3. The V-shaped fissura prima on the superior surface cuts 
the superior vermis at the junction of its anterior 
two-third and posterior one-third. It divides the corpus 
cerebelli into anterior and posterior (middle) lobes.
N.B. There are several other fissures which subdivide the 
vermis and cerebellar hemispheres into lobules and given 
fanciful names. Most of them are ignored to lessen the 
complexity of the cerebellum and only those which have a 
functional or descriptive value are given.
SUBDIVISIONS OF THE CEREBELLUM
ANATOMICAL SUBDIVISIONS
Anatomically the cerebellum is divided into the following 
three lobes (Fig. 25.3):
1. Anterior.
2. Posterior.
3. Flocculonodular.
Anterior lobe: It lies on the superior surface anterior to the 
fissura prima.
Posterior/middle lobe: It lies between the fissura prima on 
the superior surface and posterolateral fissure on the inferior 
surface.
Flocculonodular lobe: It is the smallest of all and lies on the 
inferior surface in front of the posterolateral fissure.
MORPHOLOGICAL SUBDIVISIONS
Based on phylogenetic and functional criteria, the 
cerebellum is divided into the following three parts:
1. Archicerebellum.
2. Paleocerebellum.
3. Neocerebellum.
Archicerebellum (Vestibular cerebellum): Phylogenetically, it 
is the oldest part of the cerebellum. It consists of flocculo-
nodular lobe and lingula.
The archicerebellum is chiefly vestibular in connections 
and concerned with the maintenance of equilibrium, tone, and 
posture of trunk muscles.
Paleocerebellum (Spinal cerebellum): Phylogenetically, it is 
the next part of the cerebellum to appear. It consists of 
anterior lobe (except lingula) and pyramid, and the uvula of 
inferior vermis.
The paleocerebellum is chiefly spinocerebellar in 
connections and is concerned with the tone, posture, and crude 
movements of the limbs.
Neocerebellum (Cerebral cerebellum): Phylogenetically, it is 
the most recent part of the cerebellum to develop. It is made 
up of middle lobe, the largest part of the cerebellum (except 
the pyramid and the uvula of inferior vermis).
The neocerebellum is chiefly corticopontocerebellar in 
connections and is concerned with the smooth performance of 
skilled voluntary movements.
Fig. 25.3 Anatomical lobes of the cerebellum.
Fissura prima
Horizontal
fissure
Posterolateral
fissure
Anterior
lobe
Flocculo-
nodular
lobe
Posterior or
middle lobe
Nodule
Tonsil
Lingula
--- Page 392 ---
Cerebellum and Fourth Ventricle
INTERNAL STRUCTURE
The cerebellum is made up of a thin surface layer of grey 
matter, the cerebellar cortex, and a central core of white 
matter. Embedded within the central core of white matter 
are masses of grey matter called intracerebellar nuclei.
The cerebellar cortex is folded in such a way that the 
surface of cerebellum presents a series of parallel transverse 
fissures and intervening narrow leaf-like bands called folia.
Each folium consists of a slender branched lamina of central 
core of white matter covered by a thin layer of grey matter. 
The central core of white matter being arranged in the form 
of branching pattern of a tree is called arbor vitae cerebelli
(arbor vitae = tree of life).
STRUCTURE OF THE CEREBELLAR CORTEX
The structure of the cerebellar cortex is uniform throughout 
(homotypical).
Cerebellar cortex consists of the following three distinct 
layers:
1. Outer molecular layer.
2. Intermediate Purkinje cell layer.
3. Inner granular layer.
Molecular (plexiform) layer: It mainly consists of numer-
ous dendritic arborizations of Purkinje cells and relatively 
few nerve cells which are widely spaced. The nerve cells 
are of two types: (a) the basket cells and (b) the stellate 
cells.
Purkinje cell layer: It consists of a single row of large flask-
shaped cells, the Purkinje cells.
The outgoing Purkinje axons constitute the sole output from 
the cerebellar cortex and exert an inhibitory influence on the 
intracerebellar nuclei.
Granular layer: The inner granular layer consists of numerous 
closely packed small granule cells. This layer also contains 
few large Golgi cells.
Intrinsic Neurons of the Cerebellar Cortex
There are five types of intrinsic neurons in the cerebellar 
cortex, viz.
1. Purkinje cells.
2. Granule cells.
3. Stellate cells.
4. Basket cells.
5. Golgi cells.
All the intrinsic neurons of cerebellar cortex are inhibitory 
except granule cells. Such a collection of inhibitory neurons is 
not found anywhere else in the central nervous system except in 
the cerebellum.
INTRACEREBELLAR NUCLEI
The intracerebellar nuclei (also called central nuclei) are masses 
of grey matter embedded in the white matter of the cerebellum. 
On each side of the midline they are four in number. From 
lateral to medial side, these are: dentate nucleus, emboliform 
nucleus, globose nucleus, and fastigial nucleus (Fig. 25.4).
1. The dentate nucleus is the most prominent of the 
intracerebellar nuclei and largest in primates, especially 
in humans. It is the nucleus of neocerebellum, and 
therefore receives afferent fibres from it.
2. The emboliform nucleus is oval in shape and situated 
medial to the dentate nucleus, partially covering its hilum. 
It is the nucleus of paleocerebellum, hence receives afferent 
fibres from it.
3. The globose nucleus is rounded in shape and lies between 
the emboliform and fastigial nuclei. It has similar 
connections to that of the emboliform nucleus. The 
globose and emboliform nuclei together are sometimes 
referred to as nucleus interpositus.
4. The fastigial nucleus lies near the midline in the vermis 
and close to the roof of the 4th ventricle is the nucleus of 
archicerebellum, hence receives afferent fibres from the 
flocculonodular lobe (archicerebellum).
The nuclear connections of the cerebellum are summarized 
in Flowchart 25.1.
Lingula
Fastigial nucleus
Globose nucleus
Emboliform
nucleus
Nucleus
interpositus
Dentate
nucleus
Horizontal
fissure
Sulcus valleculae
Inferior vermis
Fig. 25.4 Transverse section of the cerebellum showing 
intra cerebellar nuclei.
Neocerebellum
Dentate nucleus
Red nucleus and thalamus
Globose and emboliform nuclei
Paleocerebellum
Archicerebellum
Fastigial nucleus
Red nucleus
Vestibular nuclei 
Flowchart 25.1 Nuclear connections of the cerebellum.
--- Page 393 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
CEREBELLAR PEDUNCLES
The afferent and efferent fibres of the cerebellum are 
grouped together on each side into three large bundles 
called cerebellar peduncles.
The superior cerebellar peduncles connect the cerebellum 
to the midbrain, the middle cerebellar peduncles to the pons, 
and the inferior cerebellar peduncles to the medulla 
oblongata.
The inferior cerebellar peduncle is formed on the 
posterolateral aspect of the upper half of the medulla 
oblongata. It consists of a large number of afferent and 
efferent fibres. The inferior cerebellar peduncle consists mainly 
of afferent fibres to the cerebellum from the spinal cord, the 
olivary nuclei, the reticular formation of the medulla, and the 
vestibular nuclei and nerve. It also transmits a few efferent 
fibres from the cerebellum to the medulla, principally to the 
vestibular nuclei and reticular formation.
The middle cerebellar peduncle is the largest of the three 
peduncles. It is formed at the posterolateral margin of the 
pons. The middle cerebellar peduncle consists of only afferent 
fibres which arise from the pontine nuclei of the opposite side.
The superior cerebellar peduncle emerges from the anterior 
cerebellar notch and forms the lateral boundary of the upper 
half of the 4th ventricle. It mainly consists of efferent fibres passing 
from the dentate nucleus to the red nucleus, thalamus and cerebral 
cortex of the opposite side. It is the principal efferent pathway from 
the cerebellum and its fibres arise mainly in the dentate nucleus.
ARTERIAL SUPPLY OF THE CEREBELLUM
The cerebellum is supplied by three pairs of cerebellar arteries:
Superior cerebellar artery: a branch of basilar artery 
supplies the superior surface of the cerebellum.
Anterior inferior cerebellar artery: a branch of basilar 
artery supplies the anterior part of the inferior surface of 
the cerebellum.
3. Posterior inferior cerebellar artery: a branch of vertebral 
artery supplies the posterior part of the inferior surface of 
the cerebellum.
Lesions of cerebellum: The cerebellar lesions due to 
trauma, vascular occlusion, tumors, etc. produce a number 
of signs and symptoms, which together constitute the 
cerebellar syndrome.
The characteristic signs and symptoms of the cerebellar 
syndrome are as follows:
(a) Generalized muscular hypotonia, leading to staggering 
gait (i.e., the patient walks with legs well apart) and 
ataxia (i.e., inability to maintain balance while walking).
(b) Intention tremors at the end of a voluntary act, and 
disappear with rest.
Clinical correlation
(c) Adiadochokinesis, i.e., inability to perform rapidly 
alternating opposite movements, e.g., pronation and 
supination.
(d) Dysarthria or scanning speech, i.e., speech is slurred, 
monotonous with pauses at wrong places.
(e) Nystagmus, i.e., involuntary ‘to and fro’ oscillatory 
movements of the eyeballs while looking to either side 
due to defective postural fixation of the conjugate gaze.
Swaying toward the side of lesion on walking.
(g) Falling on the side of lesion on closing the eyes 
(Romberg’s sign).
FOURTH VENTRICLE
The 4th ventricle is a tent-like cavity of the hindbrain lined 
with ependyma and filled with cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). It 
is situated in the posterior cranial fossa in front of the 
cerebellum and behind the pons and the upper part of 
medulla oblongata. The cavity of the ventricle presents a 
triangular outline in the sagittal section and appears 
rhomboidal (lozenge shaped) in the horizontal section. It is 
continuous inferiorly with the central canal of medulla 
oblongata and superiorly with the cerebral aqueduct of the 
midbrain (Fig. 25.1).
The understanding of the 4th ventricle is essential, firstly 
because it is strategically placed in the midst of vital 
structures present in the medulla, pons, and cerebellum, 
and secondly because its roof possesses three important 
openings which permit the CSF to escape from the 
ventricular system of the brain to the subarachnoid space.
Locus ceruleus
Median sulcus
Facial colliculus
Superior fovea
Vestibular area
Tenia
Vagal triangle
Inferior cerebellar
peduncle
Area postrema
Superior
cerebellar
peduncle
Sulcus
limitans
Stria medullaris
Hypoglossal
triangle
Inferior fovea
Obex
Funiculus separans
Fig. 25.5 Rhomboid fossa (floor of the 4th ventricle) 
(C = cuneate tubercle, G = gracile tubercle).
--- Page 394 ---
Cerebellum and Fourth Ventricle
BOUNDARIES
The b oundaries of the 4th ventricle include lateral bounda-
ries, a roof, and a floor.
Lateral Boundaries (Lateral Walls)
On each side, the 4th ventricle is bounded,
(a) inferolaterally by the inferior cerebellar peduncle, sup-
plemented by gracile and cuneate tubercles, and
(b) superolaterally by the superior cerebellar peduncle.
Roof (Posterior Wall)
The roof of the 4th ventricle is tent-shaped and has upper 
and lower sloping surfaces. The apex of the tent extends 
posteriorly into the white core of the cerebellum.
The upper part of the roof is formed by a thin sheet of white 
matter, the superior medullary velum that stretches between 
the two superior cerebellar peduncles.
The lower part of the roof is formed by a thin sheet of 
non-nervous tissue, the inferior medullary velum that is 
formed conjointly by the ventricular ependyma and the pia 
mater.
The lower part of the roof is perforated by a midline slit,
the median aperture (the foramen of Magendie) through 
which the cavity of the 4th ventricle communicates with the 
subarachnoid space of the cerebellomedullary cistern (cisterna 
magna).
The cavity of the 4th ventricle is prolonged laterally as a 
narrow lateral recess behind and around the inferior 
cerebellar peduncle which opens as lateral aperture (foramen 
of Luschka) into the subarachnoid space in the region of 
cerebellopontine angle.
Through these three apertures in the lower part of the 
roof of the 4th ventricle, CSF escapes from the ventricular 
system into the subarachnoid space for absorption by the 
arachnoid villi and granulations.
Choroid Plexuses of the Fourth Ventricle
The choroid plexus is a tuft of capillaries that project into 
the cavity of the 4th ventricle through the lower part of its 
roof. It receives its blood supply from a branch of posterior 
inferior cerebellar artery. The entire plexus is ‘T-shaped’, 
where the vertical limb of ‘T’ is double with foramen of 
Magendie intervening between the two limbs. The 
horizontal limb of plexus on either side extends into the 
lateral recess and protrudes through the lateral aperture, 
the foramen of Luschka into the subarachnoid space, and 
can be seen on the surface of the brain, near the flocculus of 
the cerebellum.
Floor (Rhomboid Fossa)
The floor of the 4th ventricle is formed by the posterior 
surface of the pons and the upper part of the medulla. It is 
rhomboid in shape (diamond shaped) and because of its 
shape, the floor of the 4th ventricle is often called rhomboid 
fossa (Fig. 25.5). It is divisible into two parts.
The upper triangular part is bounded on each side by the 
superior cerebellar peduncle, while the lower triangular part 
is bounded on each side by gracile and cuneate tubercles and 
the inferior cerebellar peduncle.
Features of the floor of the fourth ventricle 
(Rhomboid fossa)
The floor of the 4th ventricle exhibits the following features:
1. The entire floor is divided into right and left symmetrical 
halves by a median sulcus, which extends from the 
aperture of the aqueduct of the midbrain above to the 
commencement of the central canal below.
2. At its widest part, the floor is crossed transversely by 
glistening white fibres, the stria medullaris. These fibres 
are derived from arcuate nuclei, which emerge from the 
median sulcus and run transversely across the floor to 
enter into the inferior cerebellar peduncle.
3. On either side of the median sulcus, there is a longitudi-
nal elevation called medial eminence.
4. The medial eminence is bounded laterally by sulcus
limitans.
5. At the lateral angle of the floor, the region lateral to sulcus 
limitans overlies the vestibular nuclei and hence it is 
termed the vestibular area.
6. The upper end of sulcus limitans widens into a 
triangular depression called superior fovea. Above the 
superior fovea, the sulcus limitans flattens out and 
presents a bluish grey area called locus ceruleus. The 
color is imparted by the underlying group of nerve cells 
containing melanin pigment which constitute the 
substantia ferruginea.
7. The lowermost part of sulcus limitans presents a small 
depression called inferior fovea.
8. On either side, the medial eminence presents an oval 
swelling in the pontine part of floor at the level of 
superior fovea, the facial colliculus. The swelling is 
produced by the fibres from the motor nucleus of facial 
nerve hooking around the abducent nucleus (internal 
genu of the facial nerve).
9. From inferior fovea, the sulcus limitans descends obliquely 
toward the median sulcus. This sulcus divides the medial 
eminence in the medullary part of the floor into two 
triangles: the hypoglossal triangle above and the vagal 
triangle below.
--- Page 395 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
10. The hypoglossal triangle is divided by a faint oblique 
furrow into a medial part overlying the nucleus of the 
hypoglossal nerve and a lateral part overlying the nucleus
intercalatus.
11. The vagal triangle overlies the nuclei of vagus, 
glossopharyngeal, and cranial accessory nerves.
12. The vagal triangle is crossed by a narrow translucent ridge 
called funiculus separans. A small area between the 
funiculus separans above and the gracile tubercle below 
is called area postrema.
13. The inferolateral margins of the 4th ventricle are marked 
by a narrow white ridge called tenia. The two teniae meet 
at the inferior angle of the ventricle to form a small fold 
called obex. The obex forms the roof of the inferior angle 
of the 4th ventricle. The term obex is often used to denote 
the inferior angle of the 4th ventricle.
Tumors of the fourth ventricle: The tumors in the region 
of the 4th ventricle are not uncommon. The tumors of 
fourth ventricle are ependymoma and medulloblstoma. 
The most common tumor in this region is medullo-
blastoma. It arises from the poorly differentiated primitive 
neuroectodermal cells of cerebellar vermis and occurs 
mostly in children.
The medulloblastoma is highly malignant and produces 
the signs and symptoms of cerebellar lesions. It may press 
upon the vital centres located beneath the floor of the 
ventricle causing cardiac irregularities, tachycardia, irregular 
respiration, and vasomotor disturbances.
The ependymoma arises from proliferation of ependymal 
cells. It may cause obstruction to the flow of CSF which may 
lead to the formation of internal hydrocephalus.
Clinical correlation
--- Page 396 ---
Cerebellum and Fourth Ventricle
Golden Facts to Remember
  Oldest part (phylogenetically) of the cerebellum
Archicerebellum
  Most recent part (phylogenetically) of the cerebellum
Neocerebellum
  Largest cerebellar peduncle
Middle cerebellar peduncle
  Largest and the most prominent intracerebellar 
nucleus
Dentate nucleus
  All the afferent fibres of the cerebellum are mossy 
fibres except
Olivocerebellar and par-olivocerebellar fibres 
which are climbing fibres
  All the intrinsic neurons of the cerebellar cortex are 
inhibitory except
Granule cells
  Most conspicuous fissure of the cerebellum
Horizontal fissure
  Arbor vitae cerebelli
Central core of white matter of the cerebellum 
arranged in the form of the branching pattern 
of a tree
  Largest intrinsic neurons of the cerebellum
Purkinje cells
  Only neurons of cerebellar cortex which can transmit 
efferent impulses to intracerebellar nuclei
Purkinje cells
  Parts of the cerebellum liable to herniate through the 
foramen magnum
Tonsils
A 45-year-old person visited his family physician and 
complained that he noticed clumsiness in his right 
hand. The symptoms had started 3 months back but 
now they were getting worse day by day. He also noticed 
tremors when he wrote, which disappeared as he 
stopped writing. He also told that he tends to sway 
toward the right side while walking. He was referred to 
a neurologist who on examination found hypotonia of 
muscles on the right side. When asked to walk along a 
straight line on the floor, he swayed over to the right side 
and when he was asked to touch the tip of his nose with 
his right index finger, the finger started tremoring as it 
was nearing the nose and overshot the target. When he 
was asked to perform rapidly alternating opposite 
movements (e.g., supination and pronation), he could
not do so by his right hand. The MRI of skull revealed a 
a large tumor in his right cerebellar hemisphere.
Questions
1. What are the three parts of the cerebellum?
2. What are the main functions of the cerebellum?
3. Enumerate the three morphological subdivisions 
of the cerebellum and mention the primary 
function of each subdivision.
Answers
1. Two cerebellar hemispheres and a vermis.
2. The main functions of the cerebellum are: the 
maintenance of equilibrium and posture, the 
regulation of muscle tone, and the coordination of 
somatic motor activities.
3. The three morphological subdivisions of the 
cerebellum are: archicerebellum, paleocerebellum, 
and neocerebellum.
The maintenance of equilibrium is the primary 
function of the archicerebellum, the regulation of 
muscle tone and posture of trunk and limbs is the 
primary function of the paleocerebellum, and the smooth 
performance of fine voluntary movements is the 
primary function of the neocerebellum.
Clinical Case Study
--- Page 397 ---
Diencephalon and 
Third Ventricle
CHAPTER
DIENCEPHALON
The diencephalon is a part of brain situated cranial to the 
midbrain and is more or less completely surrounded by the 
cerebrum. The only part of diencephalon which is exposed 
to the surface is at the base of the brain in the region of 
interpeduncular fossa. The cavity within the diencephalon is 
termed the 3rd ventricle. It communicates on either side 
with the lateral ventricle of the cerebral hemisphere.
The cavity of the 3rd ventricle divides the diencephalon 
into two (right and left) symmetrical halves.
DIVISIONS AND SUBDIVISIONS
The diencephalon is divided into two major parts: pars
dorsalis and pars ventralis. These subdivisions are seen in 
midsagittal view of the brain and are separated from each 
other by a shallow groove, the hypothalamic sulcus, which 
extends from interventricular foramen to the rostral end of 
the cerebral aqueduct of the midbrain (Fig. 26.4).
Pars dorsalis lies above (dorsal) the hypothalamic sulcus
and consists of: (a) thalamus, (b) metathalamus, and 
(c) epithalamus.
Pars ventralis lies below (ventral) the hypothalamic sulcus
and consists of: (a) subthalamus and (b) hypothalamus.
Thus the diencephalon is divided into five parts: thalamus, 
metathalamus, epithalamus, subthalamus, and hypothalamus. 
Each of these parts has further subdivisions.
The main divisions and subdivisions of the diencephalon 
are listed in Table 26.1.
THALAMUS
Anatomically, thalamus is a large ovoid mass of grey matter 
lying above the midbrain, from which it is separated by a 
small amount of neural tissue, the subthalamus. There are 
two thalami situated one on each side of a slit-like cavity, the 
3rd ventricle (Fig. 26.1).
Fig. 26.1 The thalami and 3rd ventricle as seen from above, 
after removing the overlying tela choroidea.
Inferior
colliculus and
brachium
Superior
colliculus and
brachium
Groove for
fornix
Thalamus
Stria terminalis
Lateral ventricle’s
anterior horn
Cavity of septum
pellucidum
Septum
pellucidum
Columns of fornix
Interthalamic
adhesion
Third ventricle
Habenular trigone
Thalamic pulvinar
Pineal gland
Stria medullaris
thalami
Genu of corpus callosum
Head of caudate
nucleus
Thalamostriate
vein
Table 26.1 Divisions and subdivisions of the diencephalon
Divisions
Subdivisions
Pars dorsalis
• Thalamus (dorsal thalamus)
• Metathalamus
Medial and lateral
geniculate bodies
• Epithalamus
Pineal gland, habenular
nuclei and commissure,
and posterior commissure
Pars ventralis
• Subthalamus (ventral 
thalamus)
Subthalamic nucleus
and zona inserta
• Hypothalamus
--- Page 398 ---
Diencephalon and Third Ventricle
Each thalamus is 3.5 cm in length and 1.5 cm in breadth.
The long axes of the thalami are set obliquely, running 
backward and laterally. The pointed anterior ends are 
nearer to the median plane, whereas the wider posterior 
ends are separated from each other by pineal body, superior 
colliculi, and habenular triangles. The thalami are usually 
attached across the median plane by a narrow interthalamic 
connexus of grey matter (also called interthalamic 
adhesion). Each thalamus forms most of the lateral wall of 
the 3rd ventricle and floor of the central part of the lateral 
ventricle.
Functionally, thalamus is considered as the great sensory gate-
way to the cerebral cortex. It receives impulses from the oppo-
site half of the body and transmits most of them to the 
sensory area of the cerebral cortex (Brodmann areas 3, 2 
and 1).
External Features
Each thalamus has two ends and four surfaces.
Ends
Anterior end
The anterior end is narrow and constitutes the tubercle of 
thalamus. It forms the posterior boundary of the interven-
tricular foramen.
Posterior end
The posterior end is expanded and is known as pulvinar. It 
overhangs the medial and lateral geniculate bodies and 
superior colliculi with their brachia.
Surfaces
Superior surface
Its lateral part forms the floor of the central part of the lateral 
ventricle and its medial part is covered by the tela choroidea 
of the 3rd ventricle.
Inferior surface
Its anterior part is fused with the subthalamus while its pos-
terior part is free, forming the inferior aspect of the pulvinar.
Medial surface
It forms the greater part of the lateral wall of the 3rd ventricle.
Lateral surface
It forms the medial boundary of the posterior limb of the 
internal capsule.
Parts of the Thalamus
The thalamus is traversed anteroposteriorly by a vertical 
sheet of white fibres, the internal medullary lamina which 
bifurcates anteriorly to assume a Y-shaped configuration. This 
Y-shaped internal medullary lamina divides the thalamus into 
three main parts: anterior, medial and lateral.
The anterior part includes the anterior tubercle and lies 
between the ‘limbs’ of the ‘Y’. The medial and lateral parts lie 
on either side of the ‘stem’ of the ‘Y’. Each of these parts 
consists of a number of nuclei.
Nuclei of the Thalamus (Fig. 26.2)
Nuclei in the anterior part
The nuclei in this part are collectively referred to as anterior 
nucleus.
Nuclei in the medial part
Nuclei in medial part consist of a large medial dorsal nucleus
and a small medial ventral nucleus.
Nuclei in the lateral part
The lateral part is divided into dorsal and ventral parts.
The dorsal part is subdivided craniocaudally into three 
nuclei: (a) lateral dorsal (LD), (b) lateral posterior (LP), and 
(c) a large caudal nuclear mass, the pulvinar (P). These nuclei 
are termed dorsal tier of nuclei.
The ventral part is also subdivided craniocaudally into 
three nuclei: (a) ventral anterior (VA), (b) ventral lateral (VL) 
or ventral intermediate (VI), and (c) ventral posterior (VP). 
These nuclei are termed ventral tier of nuclei.
The ventral posterior nucleus (VP) is further subdivided 
into a lateral part, the ventral posterolateral nucleus (VPL) 
and a medial part, the ventral posteromedial nucleus (VPM).
The thalamic nuclei are summarized in Table 26.2.
Connections of the Thalamic Nuclei
The important connections of thalamic nuclei are as follows:
Reticular
nucleus
External medullary
lamina
Lateral
geniculate body
Medial
geniculate body
Internal
medullary lamina
Medial dorsal nucleus
(mediodorsal nucleus)
Midline nuclei
Anterior nucleus
Fig. 26.2 Horizontal section of the thalamus (schematic) to 
show the location of various thalamic nuclei (LD = lateral 
dorsal nucleus, LP = lateral posterior nucleus, P = pulvinar, 
VA = ventral anterior nucleus, VL = ventral lateral nucleus, 
VPL = ventral posterolateral nucleus).
--- Page 399 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
From a clinical point of view the connections of ventral 
posterior nucleus are most important because its smaller 
medial portion, the ventral posteromedial nucleus (VPM) 
receives general sensory modalities from the head and face 
through trigeminal lemniscus and tastes sensations from 
taste buds through solitariothalamic tract; and its larger 
lateral portion, the ventral posterolateral nucleus (VPL) 
receives exteroceptive sensations (pain, touch, temperature) 
through spinal lemniscus and proprioceptive sensations 
(muscle 
joint 
sense, 
vibration, 
two-point 
discrimination) through medial lemniscus, from the rest of 
the body except face and head.
All the sensations reaching the ventral posterior nucleus 
are carried to the primary sensory area of the cerebral cortex 
by fibres passing through the posterior limb of the internal 
capsule (superior thalamic radiation). The vascular lesions 
involve posterior limb of the internal capsule which some-
times cause impairment of all forms of sensibility on the 
opposite side of the body.
The integrity of anterior nucleus and its connections is 
necessary for attention and recent memory, therefore, a 
lesion involving it can lead to loss of recent memory.
Since the medial dorsal nucleus is associated with 
‘moods’ and emotional balance, depending on the nature of 
the present sensory input and past experience, the mood 
may be that of well-being or malaise, or of euphoria or 
mild depression.
Functions of the Thalamus
The main functions of the thalamus are as follows:
1. It is a sensory integration and relay station of all the 
sensory pathways except for the olfactory pathway which 
is projected directly to the cerebral cortex without being 
relayed in the thalamus.
2. It is capable of recognition, though poorly, of pain, 
thermal and some tactile sensations at its own level.
Thalamic syndrome: It usually occurs subsequent to a 
vascular lesion of the thalamus, when the patient is 
recovering from a thalamic infarct.
Characteristic features
In thalamic syndrome, the threshold for pain, touch, and 
temperature is decreased on the opposite side of the body 
(thalamic overreaction), but when the threshold is reached, 
the sensations are exaggerated, perverted, and disagreea-
ble. For example, the prick of a pin may be felt as a severe 
burning sensation and music that is ordinarily pleasing may 
be disagreeable. Sometimes even light touch may produce 
excruciating pain, which may become intractable and fail to 
respond to powerful analgesics (pain-relieving) drugs. There 
may be emotional instability with spontaneous laughing and 
crying.
Clinical correlation
METATHALAMUS
The metathalamus consists of medial and lateral geniculate 
bodies. These are small rounded elevations on the inferior 
aspect of the posterior part of the thalamus, lateral to each 
side of the midbrain. The medial and lateral geniculate 
bodies are relay stations for the auditory and visual pathways, 
respectively.
Medial Geniculate Body
Medial geniculate body is an oval elevation on the inferior 
aspect of the pulvinar of the thalamus, lateral to the superior 
colliculus. It is more prominent than the lateral geniculate 
body. The inferior brachium runs upward, laterally and 
forward from inferior colliculus of the midbrain to the medial 
geniculate body.
The inferior brachium conveys auditory impulses to the lat-
eral geniculate body for onward transmission to the (primary 
auditory area of the) cerebral cortex.
Lateral Geniculate Body
Lateral geniculate body is a small ovoid prominence visible 
at the terminal end of the optic tract. It is situated on the 
inferior surface of the pulvinar, anterolateral to the medial 
geniculate body. It is smaller than the medial geniculate body 
and connected to the superior colliculus by the superior 
brachium.
The fibres of superior brachium are concerned with the 
production of visual reflexes such as turning of head and 
eyes toward the sudden flash of light and constriction of 
pupil when light falls or is thrown on the retina.
The lateral geniculate body receives retinal fibres of both the 
eyes (from temporal half of the retina of the same side and 
nasal half of the retina of the opposite side) through optic 
tract and gives rise to fibres of the optic radiation which convey 
visual impulses to the visual cortex of the occipital lobe.
Table 26.2 Nuclei in different parts of the thalamus
Part
Nuclei
Anterior part
Anterior nucleus
Medial part
Medial dorsal nucleus,
medial ventral nucleus
Lateral part
• Dorsal tier nuclei
Lateral dorsal, lateral
posterior, pulvinar
• Ventral tier nuclei
Ventral anterior (VA), ventral
lateral (VL), ventral posterior:
(a) ventral posterolateral (VPL),
(b) ventral posteromedial (VPM)
--- Page 400 ---
Diencephalon and Third Ventricle
EPITHALAMUS
Pineal Gland (Epiphysis Cerebri)
Pineal gland is a midline cone-shaped reddish grey structure 
(only 3 mm  5 mm in size) occupying the vertical groove 
between the two superior colliculi below the splenium of 
corpus callosum. It projects back from the posterior wall of 
the 3rd ventricle, below the splenium of the corpus callosum. 
It has a stalk which divides into two laminae. The ventral (or 
inferior) lamina continues with the posterior commissure
and the dorsal (or superior) lamina continues with the 
habenular commissure. The extension of the cavity of the 
3rd ventricle between the two laminae is termed pineal
recess.
Structure and Functions
The pineal gland is a neuroendocrine gland and consists of 
parenchymal cells, called pinealocytes and neuroglial cells. 
The pinealocytes secrete a hormone called melatonin. The
calcium phosphates and carbonates are deposited in the 
gland with age in the form of multilaminar corpuscles called 
corpora arenacea or brain sand. They are often seen as tiny 
shadows in radiographs of the skull. A displaced calcified 
pineal gland indicates a space-occupying lesion within the 
brain.
Pineal secretions including melatonin have an inhibitory 
effect on other endocrine glands and gonads.
Unique Features
Pineal gland is the only part of the brain which has no neural 
tissue in it.
It is the only part of the brain which is supplied by a nerve 
(nervus conarii) which arises from outside the brain from 
superior cervical sympathetic ganglion in the neck.
SUBTHALAMUS
Subthalamus is described in detail on page 401.
HYPOTHALAMUS
The hypothalamus is a part of the diencephalon which lies 
below the thalamus. It forms the floor and the lower parts of 
lateral walls of the 3rd ventricle. Anatomically, hypothala-
mus is small in size weighing only 4 g and forming only 
0.3% of the total brain mass, but physiologically there is 
hardly any activity in the body that is not influenced by it. 
Thus, the functional significance of hypothalamus is dispro-
portionate to its size. The hypothalamus controls the auto-
nomic and endocrine systems at the highest level, and is also 
involved in some affective or emotional behavior. Being the 
principal autonomic centre of the brain, it has been regarded 
as the head ganglion of the autonomic nervous system by 
Sherrington.
Boundaries of the Hypothalamus
The boundaries of the hypothalamus are as follows:
Anteriorly: Lamina terminalis (lamina terminalis extends from 
the optic chiasma to the anterior commissure).
Posteriorly Subthalamus.
Inferiorly: Structures in the floor of the 3rd ventricle, viz.
tuber cinereum, infundibulum and mammillary 
bodies. (These structures are actually the parts 
of hypothalamus itself.)
Superiorly: Thalamus.
Laterally: 
Internal capsule.
Medially: 
Cavity of the 3rd ventricle.
Subdivisions of the Hypothalamus
The hypothalamus is also subdivided anteroposteriorly into 
the following four regions:
1. Preoptic region—adjoining the lamina terminalis.
2. Supraoptic region—above the optic chiasma.
3. Tuberal region—includes the tuber cinereum, infundibu-
lum and area around it.
4. Mammillary region—includes the mammillary bodies 
and area around it.
The preoptic region lies anterior to the hypothalamus 
between the optic chiasma and anterior commissure. 
Anatomically, it belongs to telencephalon but functionally it 
belongs to hypothalamus.
The tuber cinereum is the region bounded caudally by 
mammillary bodies and rostrally by optic chiasma. The 
infundibulum connects the posterior lobe of the hypophysis 
cerebri with the tuber cinereum. The tuber cinereum around 
the base of the infundibulum is raised to form a median
eminence.
Hypothalamic Nuclei
The hypothalamus consists of numerous cell groups called 
hypothalamic nuclei. The nuclei present in different regions 
of the hypothalamus are listed in Table 26.3 and shown in 
Figure 26.3.
Table 26.3 Hypothalamic regions and nuclei in them
Region
Nucleus/nuclei
Preoptic region
• Preoptic nucleus
Supraoptic region
• Supraoptic nucleus
• Anterior nucleus
• Paraventricular nucleus
Tuberal region
• Arcuate (infundibular) nucleus
• Ventromedial nucleus
• Dorsomedial nucleus
Mammillary region
• Posterior nucleus
• Mammillary nuclei
--- Page 401 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
Connections of the Hypothalamus
The connections of the hypothalamus are numerous and 
complex, therefore, only main connections are described 
below:
1. The axons of supraoptic and paraventricular nuclei run 
in the pituitary stalk to reach the posterior pituitary 
(neurohypophysis) and form the hypothalamohypophy-
seal tract. These axons transport the neurohormones—
vasopressin and oxytocin—synthesized in supraoptic 
nucleus and paraventricular nucleus, respectively, to the 
posterior pituitary.
2. The axons of other cell groups, e.g., tuberal nuclei enter 
the region of median eminence to deliver their 
neurosecretory material to the hypothalamohypophyseal 
portal system of blood vessels to control the secretion of 
hormones from the anterior pituitary (adenohypophysis).
3. The long axons from thalamus pass through the 
brainstem and spinal cord to synapse with the 
preganglionic sympathetic cells in the lateral horns of 
the thoracic and upper two lumbar spinal segments and 
with the preganglionic parasympathetic cells in the 
lateral horns of the S2, S3, and S4 spinal segments to 
form hypothalamospinal tract.
4. Mammillothalamic tract connects the mammillary 
body to the anterior nucleus of the thalamus, which in 
turn projects to the cingulate gyrus.
Functions of the Hypothalamus
1. Autonomic control: The anterior part of the hypothala-
mus controls the parasympathetic nervous system while 
posterior part controls the sympathetic nervous system.
2. Endocrine control: Regulates the hormonal secretion of 
the anterior pituitary by forming the releasing factors or 
release inhibiting factors which in turn control the 
endocrine activities of the body.
3. Neurosecretion: Secretes neurohormones: oxytocin and 
vasopressin.
4. Regulation of food and water intake: The lateral part of 
the hypothalamus acts as hunger centre while the medial 
part acts as satiety centre. A thirst centre in the lateral 
part regulates water intake.
5. Emotional expression: Plays an important role in the 
expression of autonomic emotions like laughing, crying, 
sweating, or blushing mediated by the integrated activity 
of the ANS and somatic efferent system.
6. Sexual behavior and reproduction: Regulates the sexual 
behavior and reproduction by influencing the secretion 
of gonadotrophic hormones by the pituitary gland.
7. Temperature regulation: The anterior portion of the 
hypothalamus prevents the rise in body temperature 
while posterior portion promotes heat conservation and 
heat production.
8. Biological clock: Regulates the cyclic activities of the 
body (circadian rhythm), viz. sleeping and waking cycle, 
but itself affected by diurnal rhythms. The circadian
rhythm for many body functions is about 24 hours.
THIRD VENTRICLE
The 3rd ventricle is the cavity of diencephalon. It is a midline 
slit-like cavity situated between two thalami and part of 
hypothalamus. It extends from the lamina terminalis 
anteriorly to the superior end of the cerebral aqueduct of the 
midbrain posteriorly. The cavity of the 3rd ventricle is lined 
by ciliated columnar epithelium, the ependyma and traversed 
horizontally by a mass of grey matter, the interthalamic 
adhesion, connecting the two thalami. The outline of the 
cavity is irregular due to the presence of several diverticula or 
recesses.
Anteriorly on each side, the 3rd ventricle communicates 
with the lateral ventricle through interventricular foramen 
(of Monro), and posteriorly with the 4th ventricle through 
cerebral aqueduct (of Sylvius).
BOUNDARIES
The 3rd ventricle has anterior wall, posterior wall, roof, floor 
and two lateral walls (Fig. 26.4).
Anterior wall is formed from above downward by:
(a) anterior column of fornix,
(b) anterior commissure, and
(c) lamina terminalis.
Fig. 26.3 Different nuclei of the hypothalamus as seen in 
the sagittal section.
Aqueduct of
Sylvius
Posterior
nucleus
Hypothalamic
sulcus
Dorsomedial
nucleus
Fornix
Interventricular
foramen
Anterior
commissure
Paraventricular
nucleus
Lamina terminalis
Anterior nucleus
Preoptic nucleus
Supraoptic
nucleus
Ventromedial
nucleus
Arcuate
(infundibular)
nucleus
Mammillary
nucleus
--- Page 402 ---
Diencephalon and Third Ventricle
Posterior wall: formed from above downward by:
(a) pineal gland,
(b) posterior commissure, and
(c) commencement of cerebral aqueduct
Roof: Formed by the ependyma that stretches across the 
upper limits of two thalami
Floor: Formed from before backward by:
(a) optic chiasma,
(b) tuber cinereum and infundibulum,
(c) mammillary bodies,
(d) posterior perforated substance, and
(e) tegmentum of the midbrain.
N.B. All structures of the floor belong to interpeduncular 
fossa except the optic chiasma and tegmentum of the 
midbrain.
Lateral wall: marked by a curved sulcus, the hypothalamic 
sulcus extending from the interventricular foramen to the 
upper end of the cerebral aqueduct. The sulcus divides the 
lateral wall into a larger upper part and a smaller lower 
part.
The larger upper part of the lateral wall is formed by the 
medial surface of the anterior two-third of the thalamus.
The smaller lower part of the lateral wall is formed by the 
hypothalamus and it is continuous with the ventricular floor.
N.B. The two lateral walls of the 3rd ventricle are normally 
closely approximated, hence in coronal section of the brain 
the cavity of the 3rd ventricle appears as a median vertical 
slit (Fig. 26.1).
RECESSES
The cavity of the 3rd ventricle extends into the surrounding 
structures as pocket-like protrusions called recesses (Fig. 26.4). 
These are as follows:
1. Infundibular recess: It is a deep tunnel-shaped recess 
extending downward through the tuber cinereum into 
the infundibulum, i.e., the stalk of the pituitary gland.
2. Optic (or chiasmatic) recess: It is an angular recess 
situated at the junction of the anterior wall and the floor 
of the ventricle just above the optic chiasma.
3. Anterior recess (vulva of the ventricle): It is a triangular 
recess which extends anteriorly in front of interventricu-
lar foramen and behind anterior commissure between 
the diverging anterior columns of the fornix.
4. Suprapineal recess: It is a fairly capacious blind 
diverticulum, which extends posteriorly above the stalk 
of the pineal gland and below the tela choroidea.
5. Pineal recess: It is a small diverticulum which extends 
posteriorly between the superior and inferior laminae of 
the stalk of the pineal gland.
CHOROID PLEXUS AND TELA CHOROIDEA
The tela choroidea in the roof of the 3rd ventricle is 
triangular in shape. The choroid plexus of the 3rd ventricle 
hangs downward from the tela choroidea as two longitudinal 
anteroposterior vascular fringes.
Obstruction of third ventricle: The 3rd ventricle being a 
narrow slit-like space is easily obstructed by local brain 
tumors or congenital defects. The obstruction results in 
excessive accumulation of CSF inside the brain, resulting in 
an increased intracranial pressure in adults and in hydro-
cephalus in children.
The site of obstruction can be found out by ventriculography.
Clinical correlation
ventricle
Aqueduct of
Sylvius
Posterior
commissure
Pineal gland
Habenular
commissure
Tela choroidea
of the 3rd ventricle
Interventricular
foramen
Column of fornix
Anterior
commissure
Lamina
terminalis
Optic chiasma
Infundibulum
Hypophysis
cerebri
Mammillary body
Posterior
perforated
substance
Tegmentum
of midbrain
H.S.
Fig. 26.4 Boundaries and recesses of the 3rd ventricle as 
seen in sagittal section (HS  =  hypothalamic sulcus, 
I = interthalamic adhesion, 1 = infundibular recess, 2 = optic 
recess, 3 = anterior recess, 4 = suprapineal recess, 5 = pineal 
recess).
--- Page 403 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
Golden Facts to Remember
  Great sensory gateway to the cerebral cortex
Thalamus
  Largest somatosensory relay nucleus of the 
thalamus
Ventral posterior
  Thalamus is the final relay station of all the 
sensory modalities except
Olfaction
  Seat of soul
Pineal gland
  Biological clock in human body
Pineal gland
  All the parts of the brain consist of neural cells 
except
Pineal gland
  Only part of the brain which is supplied by a 
nerve arising from outside the brain
Pineal gland (it is supplied by nervus conarii which 
arises from superior cervical sympathetic ganglion 
in the neck)
  Head ganglion of the autonomic nervous system
Hypothalamus
  Anatomically, all the regions of hypothalamus 
belong to the diencephalon except
Preoptic region which belongs to telencephalon
A 55-year-old patient was admitted in the neurology 
ward with complaints of loss of sensation on the left 
side of his body. After a few days the patient started 
improving and there was an evidence of return of 
sensations on the affected side. Both, the treating 
doctors and relatives were very happy. Few days later he 
suddenly started complaining of agonizing pain in his 
left arm and leg. The pain would start spontaneously or 
may be initiated by the light touch of even bed sheet or 
by little exposure to the cold. The pain failed to respond 
even to powerful analgesics. He was diagnosed as a case 
of thalamic syndrome.
Questions
1. What is thalamus? What is its main function?
2. Enumerate the ventral tier of the thalamic nuclei.
3. Name the nucleus of thalamus concerned with the 
general sensations of pain, touch, and temperature 
from opposite half of the body.
4. What is thalamic syndrome?
Answers
1. The thalamus is a large ovoid mass of grey matter 
lying above the brainstem from which it is separated 
by a small amount of neutral tissue—the 
subthalamus. The main function of thalamus is 
that it is a great sensory relay station in which all 
the sensory pathways relay except olfactory.
2. The ventral tier of thalamic nuclei include ventral 
anterior (VA), ventral lateral (VL) or ventral 
intermediate (VI), and ventral posterior (VP). The 
ventral posterior nucleus is further divided into 
ventral 
posterolateral 
(VPL) 
ventral 
posteromedial (VPM) nuclei.
3. Ventral posterolateral (VPL) nucleus.
4. The thalamic syndrome is thalamic overreaction 
to the sensations of pain, touch, and temperature. 
It occurs when the patient is recovering from 
thalamic infarct following a vascular lesion of the 
thalamus.
Clinical Case Study
--- Page 404 ---
Cerebrum
CHAPTER
The cerebrum (Latin = brain) is the largest part of the brain 
that fills most of the cranial cavity above the floors of anterior 
and middle cranial fossae and above the tentorium cerebelli 
of posterior cranial fossa.
The cerebrum is a heavily convoluted bilobed structure.
A deep median cleft, the longitudinal cerebral fissure,
incompletely separates the cerebrum into two lateral halves, 
called cerebral hemispheres. The cleft lodges a sickle-shaped 
fold of the dura mater, the falx cerebri and the anterior cerebral 
vessels. Both in front and behind, the cleft is complete, but in 
the central part it extends downwards up to the corpus callosum
which is a large mass of white fibres joining the two cerebral 
hemispheres across the median plane.
The left hemisphere in right handed individuals is slightly 
larger than the right and usually termed dominant
hemisphere.
Each cerebral hemisphere consists of: (a) an outer layer of 
grey matter called cerebral cortex, (b) an inner mass of white 
matter, (c) large masses of grey matter embedded in the 
basal part of the white matter called basal ganglia/basal 
nuclei, and (d) a cavity within it called lateral ventricle.
EXTERNAL FEATURES OF THE
CEREBRAL HEMISPHERE
The external features of the cerebral hemisphere include: 
poles, surfaces, borders, sulci, and gyri.
POLES
Each cerebral hemisphere presents the following three poles:
1. The frontal pole, the anterior end of the hemisphere is 
more rounded than the occipital pole.
2. The occipital pole, the posterior end of the hemisphere 
is more pointed than the frontal pole.
3. The temporal pole between frontal and temporal poles 
points forwards. It fits into the anterior part of the 
middle cranial fossa.
SURFACES
Each cerebral hemisphere has the following three surfaces:
1. The superolateral surface is most convex and most 
extensive. It faces upwards and laterally and conforms to 
the corresponding half of the cranial vault.
2. The medial surface is flat and vertical. It presents a thick 
C-shaped cut surface of the corpus callosum.
3. The inferior surface is irregular to adopt the floors of 
anterior and middle cranial fossae. It is divided into two 
parts by a deep horizontal groove or sulcus, the stem of 
lateral sulcus, viz. (a) a small anterior part, the orbital
surface, and (b) a large posterior part, the tentorial 
surface.
BORDERS
Each cerebral hemisphere presents the following six borders: 
1. The superomedial border separates the superolateral 
surface from the medial surface.
2. The superciliary border is at the junction of superolateral 
and orbital surfaces.
3. The inferolateral border separates the superolateral 
surface from the tentorial surface.
4. The medial orbital border separates the medial surface 
from the orbital surface.
5. The inferomedial/hippocampal border surrounds the 
cerebral peduncle.
6. The medial occipital border separates the medial surface 
from the tentorial surface.
SULCI AND GYRI
The cerebral cortex is thrown into a complicated series of 
tortuous folds, called gyri or convolutions. The grooves 
between the gyri are termed as sulci. The convolutions 
greatly increase the surface area of the cerebral cortex. Most 
of the gyri and sulci are named but only important ones are 
described here.
--- Page 405 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
Each gyrus consists of a central core of white matter 
covered by an outer layer of grey matter.
Main Cerebral Sulci
Main cerebral sulci are fairly constant in position and shape 
and include lateral, central, calcarine and parieto-occipital 
sulci.
Lateral sulcus (of Sylvius) is the most conspicuous of all the 
cerebral sulci and has a stem and three rami. The stem of the 
sulcus begins as a deep cleft on the inferior surface of the 
cerebral hemisphere at the anterior perforated substance and 
extends laterally to reach the superolateral surface. On reaching 
the superolateral surface it divides into three rami: (a) anterior 
horizontal, (b) anterior ascending, and (c) posterior.
N.B. The three rami of lateral sulcus diverge from each 
other at a point called Sylvian point.
Central sulcus (of Rolando) begins by cutting the 
superomedial border of the hemisphere about 1 cm behind 
the midpoint between the frontal and occipital poles, runs 
sinuously downwards and forwards, and ends just above the 
posterior ramus of the lateral sulcus. Its upper end usually 
extends into the medial surface.
Calcarine sulcus is present on the medial surface of the 
cerebral hemisphere. It begins as a deep fissure, a little below 
the posterior end of the corpus callosum, the splenium, and 
follows an arched course with a convexity upwards to the 
occipital pole and may extend slightly onto the superolateral 
surface.
Parieto-occipital sulcus is present on the medial surface of 
the hemisphere. It begins at the midpoint of the calcarine 
sulcus and courses upwards and slightly backwards to cut the 
superomedial border of the hemisphere about 5 cm in front 
of the occipital pole, and may extend slightly onto the 
superolateral surface.
SULCI AND GYRI ON SUPEROLATERAL SURFACE
In the frontal lobe
1. The prefrontal sulcus, often broken into two or three 
parts, runs downwards and forwards parallel and little 
anterior to the central sulcus. The area between the 
central and precentral sulci is called precentral gyrus.
2. Anterior to the precentral sulcus there are two sulci 
called superior and inferior frontal sulci which run 
horizontally. These sulci divide the region of frontal lobe 
in front of precentral sulcus into superior, middle, and
inferior frontal gyri.
3. The anterior and ascending rami of lateral sulcus divide 
the inferior frontal gyrus into three parts. The part 
below the anterior ramus is called pars orbitalis, the part 
between the anterior and ascending rami is pars
triangularis, and the part posterior to the ascending 
ramus, the pars opercularis.
In the parietal lobe
1. The postcentral sulcus runs downwards and forwards, a 
little behind and parallel to the central sulcus. The area 
between these two sulci is called postcentral gyrus.
2. The rest of the parietal lobe is divided into superior and
inferior parietal lobules by an intraparietal sulcus.
In the temporal lobe
There are two sulci in this lobe that run parallel to the 
posterior ramus of the lateral sulcus. These are termed 
superior and inferior temporal sulci, and divide the temporal 
lobe into superior, middle, and inferior temporal gyri.
The superior surface of superior temporal gyrus presents 
two transverse temporal gyri. The anterior transverse 
temporal gyrus also called Heschl’s gyrus forms the primary 
auditory area of the cortex.
In the occipital lobe
The occipital lobe possesses rather three short sulci, lateral, 
and transverse occipital sulci, and lunate sulcus.
SULCI AND GYRI ON MEDIAL SURFACE
These are as follows:
1. Cingulate sulcus: It is the most prominent sulcus which 
follows a curved course about 1 cm above and parallel to 
the upper convex margin of corpus callosum. Anteriorly 
it ends below the genu of corpus callosum, posteriorly it 
turns upwards to reach the superomedial border of the 
hemisphere, a little behind the upper end of the central 
sulcus.
The area between the cingulate sulcus and corpus 
callosum is termed cingulate gyrus.
2. Callosal sulcus: It separates the cingulate gyrus from 
corpus callosum.
(a) The anterior part of medial surface between the 
cingulate sulcus and the superomedial border of the 
hemisphere is divided by a short offshoot sulcus 
ascending from the cingulate sulcus above the middle 
of the trunk of corpus callosum into two parts:
– a small part around the upper part of the central 
sulcus, the paracentral lobule, and
– a large medial part the medial frontal gyrus.
(b) The posterior part of medial surface behind the 
paracentral lobule has two main sulci: the calcarine 
sulcus, and the parieto-occipital.
– Calcarine sulcus (already described). A small 
region between the splenium and calcarine sulcus 
is termed isthmus.
– Parieto-occipital sulcus (already described).
--- Page 406 ---
Cerebrum
– The triangular area between the posterior part of 
the calcarine sulcus (also called postcalcarine
sulcus) and the parieto-occipital sulcus is called 
cuneus.
– The quadrangular area between the parieto-
occipital sulcus and paracentral lobule is termed 
precuneus.
3. A small sulcus a little above and parallel to the splenium 
is called suprasplenial sulcus. It separates the precuneus 
from the cingulate gyrus.
SULCI AND GYRI ON INFERIOR SURFACE
On the orbital part of inferior surface (orbital surface)
1. Olfactory sulcus: It is a straight sulcus which runs 
anteroposteriorly close to the medial border of the 
orbital surface. It is called olfactory sulcus because it 
lodges the olfactory bulb and tract.
The area medial to this sulcus is called gyrus rectus.
2. Orbital sulcus: It is an irregular H-shaped sulcus and 
divides the rest of the orbital surface into anterior, 
posterior, medial, and lateral orbital gyri.
On the tentorial part of inferior surface (tentorial surface)
1. The tentorial surface is marked by two major sulci that 
run anteroposteriorly. The medial one is called collateral 
sulcus and the lateral one, the occipitotemporal sulcus.
The latter is continuous around the inferolateral margin 
with the inferior temporal gyrus.
2. Posteriorly the collateral sulcus is parallel to the calcarine 
sulcus and here the area between these two sulci is 
termed lingual gyrus. Anteriorly the lingual gyrus is 
continuous with the parahippocampal gyrus. Anterior 
end of parahippocampal gyrus hooks sharply backwards 
and is limited laterally by a short rhinal sulcus. This 
hook-like anterior end of parahippocampal gyrus is 
called uncus.
Posteriorly the parahippocampal gyrus is continuous 
with the cingulate gyrus through the isthmus.
The area between the occipitotemporal sulcus laterally and the 
collateral and rhinal sulci medially is known as medial
occipitotemporal gyrus. The area lateral to the occipito-
temporal sulcus is termed lateral occipitotemporal gyrus.
This gyrus is continued around the inferolateral margin of 
the hemisphere with the inferior temporal gyrus.
LOBES OF THE CEREBRAL HEMISPHERE
The superolateral surface of each cerebral hemisphere is 
arbitrarily divided into four lobes, viz. frontal, parietal, 
temporal, and occipital with the help of: (a) three main sulci: 
central, lateral and parieto-occipital, and (b) two imaginary 
lines (Fig. 23.2).
The first imaginary line is a vertical line joining the 
parieto-occipital sulcus to the preoccipital notch, and the 
second imaginary line is a backward continuation of the 
horizontal part of the posterior ramus of the lateral sulcus 
till it joins the first line.
The frontal lobe lies anterior to the central sulcus and 
above the posterior ramus of the lateral sulcus.
The parietal lobe lies behind the central sulcus and in 
front of the upper part of the first imaginary line. Below it is 
bounded by the posterior ramus of the lateral sulcus and the 
second imaginary line.
The temporal lobe lies below the posterior ramus of 
lateral sulcus and second imaginary line. It is separated from 
the occipital lobe by the lower part of the first imaginary 
line.
The occipital lobe lies behind the vertical line joining the 
parieto-occipital sulcus and preoccipital notch.
Insula/Island of Reil (Also Called Central Lobe)
It is customary to consider the insula separately from the 
four main lobes (vide supra) of the cerebral hemisphere.
The insula is the submerged (hidden) portion of the 
cerebral cortex in the floor of the lateral sulcus. It has been 
submerged from the surface during development of brain 
due to the overgrowth of the surrounding cortical areas and 
can be seen only when the lips of the lateral sulcus are widely 
pulled apart. It is triangular in shape and surrounded all 
around by a sulcus, the circular sulcus, except anteroinferiorly 
at its apex called limen insulae which is continued with the 
anterior perforated substance.
The insula is divided into two regions, anterior and 
posterior by a central sulcus. The anterior region presents |
3 or 4 short gyri called gyri brevia and the posterior region 
presents 1 or 2 long gyri called gyri longa.
The insula is hidden from the surface view by the 
overgrown cortical areas of frontal, parietal, and temporal 
lobes. These areas are termed frontal, frontoparietal, and 
temporal opercula (operculum = lid). The superior surface 
of the temporal operculum presents the anterior and 
posterior transverse temporal gyri.
CEREBRAL CORTEX
The cerebral cortex is the surface layer of grey matter 
covering the cerebral hemisphere. The cortex represents the 
highest degree of evolutionary development of the human 
brain both in its relative size to other parts of the brain and 
its range of functions.
The main functions of the cerebral cortex include:
1. Mental activities involved in memory, learning, speech, 
language, intelligence, and creative thinking.
--- Page 407 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
2. Sensory perception, such as perception of pain, touch, 
temperature, sight, hearing, taste, smell, etc.
3. Initiation of motor commands to control activities of 
skeletal muscles.
N.B. In general, each cerebral hemisphere controls the 
opposite half of the body, i.e., it sends motor commands to 
and receives sensory information from the contralateral half 
of the body.
FUNCTIONAL AREAS
The surface of cerebral cortex was demarcated by Brodmann 
(1909) into 47 areas according to their function.
Types of cortical areas: according to classical teaching, the 
cerebral cortex possesses three types of functional areas:
1. Motor areas: primarily concerned with the motor 
functions.
2. Sensory areas: primarily concerned with the sensory 
functions.
3. Association areas: not concerned with primary motor 
or sensory functions but have more important 
associative, integrative, and cognitive functions.
N.B. Association areas occupy over 75% of the total surface 
area of the cerebral cortex in human beings.
Functional Areas in the Frontal Lobe (Figs 27.1 and 27.2)
Primary Motor Area (Area 4 of Brodmann)
Primary motor area is located in the precentral gyrus on the 
superolateral surface and extends to the anterior part of 
paracentral lobule on the medial surface of the cerebral 
hemisphere. About 40% pyramidal (corticospinal and 
corticonuclear) fibres arise from this area.
Specific regions within the area are responsible for 
movements in the specific parts of the body. Only movements 
are represented in this area and not the muscles.
In the motor area of the cerebrum, the human body is 
represented upside down, i.e. uppermost part controls the 
feet and the lowermost part controls the head, neck, face, and 
fingers.
Lesions of primary motor area in one hemisphere produce 
spastic paralysis of the extremities of the opposite half of the 
body (hemiplegia). The masticatory, laryngeal, pharyngeal, 
upper facial, and extraocular muscles are spared for being 
represented bilaterally.
Clinical correlation
Premotor Area (Area 6 of Brodmann)
Premotor area is located anterior to the primary motor area 
in the posterior parts of superior, middle, and inferior frontal 
gyri and extends on to the medial surface of the hemisphere.
The premotor area is responsible for successful 
performance of the voluntary motor activities initiated in 
the primary motor area.
Frontal Eye Field (Area 8 of Brodmann)
The frontal eye field is located in the posterior part of the 
middle frontal gyrus just anterior to the facial area of the 
precentral gyrus. It is responsible for conjugate movements 
of the eyes to the opposite side .
Motor Speech Area of Broca (Areas 44 and 45 of Brodmann)
The motor speech area is usually located in the pars 
triangularis (area 45) and pars opercularis (area 44) of 
inferior frontal gyrus of frontal lobe of left hemisphere (the 
dominant hemisphere in right handed and most of the left 
handed individuals).
Posterior end of
postcalcarine sulcus
Primary
visual
area
Visual
association
areas
Primary
somatosensory
area
Primary motor area
Premotor area
Frontal eye-field
Prefrontal area
Motor speech
area of Broca
Primary auditory
area (41, 42)
Secondary
auditory area
Sensory speech area
(of Wernicke)
Fig. 27.1 Functional cortical areas on the superolateral 
surface of the cerebral hemisphere.
Postcalcarine
sulcus
Parahippocampal
gyrus
Primary
olfactory area
Prefrontal
area
Paracentral
lobule
Uncus
17 17
Fig. 27.2 Functional cortical areas on the inferomedial 
surface of the cerebral hemisphere.
--- Page 408 ---
Cerebrum
Lesions of motor speech area of Broca result in loss of 
ability to produce proper speech, called expressive aphasia 
(also called motor aphasia). The patients face difficulty in 
finding the right words to express what they wish to say, but 
they can understand what others say.
Clinical correlation
Primary Sensory Area (Areas 3, 1, and 2 of Brodmann)
Primary sensory area is located in the postcentral gyrus and 
extends into the posterior part of the paracentral lobule on 
the medial surface of the hemisphere. The opposite half of 
the body is represented upside down exactly in same fashion 
as in the primary motor area. The primary sensory area is 
concerned with the perception of exteroceptive (pain, touch, 
and temperature) and proprioceptive (vibration, muscle, and 
joint sense) sensations from the opposite half of the body.
Lesions of primary sensory area lead to loss of appreciation 
of exteroceptive and proprioceptive sensations from the 
opposite half of the body.
Clinical correlation
Sensory Association Area (Fig. 27.1)
Sensory association area occupies the superior parietal 
lobule corresponding to the Areas 5 and 7 of Brodmann. It is 
concerned with the perception of shape, size, roughness, and 
texture of the objects. Thus it enables the individual to 
recognize the objects placed in his/her hand without seeing. 
Such ability is referred to as stereognosis.
Sensory Speech Area of Wernicke (Fig. 27.1)
Sensory speech area is located in the left dominant 
hemisphere occupying the posterior part of the superior 
temporal gyrus of temporal lobe and angular (Area 39) and 
supramarginal (Area 40) gyri of the inferior parietal lobule.
The Wernicke’s area is concerned with the understanding of 
speech, i.e. interpretation of language through visual and
auditory input.
Lesions of Wernicke’s area in the dominant hemisphere 
produce loss of ability to understand the spoken and written 
speech. This condition is called receptive aphasia.
Clinical correlation
N.B. Recently, it has been found that traditional motor and 
sensory areas are not exclusively motor or sensory but 
sensorimotor in nature. The motor areas are predominantly 
motor while the sensory areas are predominantly sensory, 
and they are abbreviated as Ms and Sm respectively 
according to relative significance of their functional 
attributes. Thus primary somatomotor area is abbreviated as 
MsI, supplementary motor area as MsII, first somatosensory 
area as SmI and second somatosensory area as Smll.
Functional Areas in the Temporal Lobe
Primary Auditory Area (Areas 41 and 42)
Primary auditory area is located on the superior surface of the 
superior temporal gyrus occupying the anterior transverse 
temporal gyrus (Heschl’s gyrus) and extends slightly to the 
adjacent part of the superior temporal gyrus (Fig. 27.1).
Secondary Auditory Area/Auditory Association Area 
(Brodmann’s Area 22)
Secondary auditory area is situated on the lateral surface of 
the superior temporal gyrus, slightly posterior to the primary 
auditory area which it surrounds (Fig. 27.1).
The primary and secondary auditory areas receive fibres 
from the medial geniculate body via the auditory radiation. 
The cochleae are bilaterally represented. Therefore, a lesion 
in one cortex does not cause unilateral deafness.
Functional Areas in the Occipital Lobe
Primary Visual Area/Striate Area (Area 17)
Primary visual area is situated mainly on the medial surface 
of the occipital lobe in the walls and floor of the posterior 
part of the calcarine sulcus (postcalcarine sulcus) and 
extends around the occipital pole onto the lateral surface of 
the occipital lobe as far as the lunate sulcus (Figs 27.1 and 
27.2).
The most marked structural feature of the visual cortex is 
the presence of white line/visual stria (of Gennari), hence 
the name—striate area.
Secondary Visual Area (Area 18 and 19)
The cortex adjacent to the primary visual area on the medial 
and lateral surfaces of the occipital lobe is occupied by 
secondary visual area (visual association area).
The visual cortex receives afferent fibres from lateral 
geniculate body via optic radiations. The visual cortex 
receives fibres from temporal half of the ipsilateral retina 
and the nasal half of the contralateral retina, i.e. it registers 
impulses from opposite field of vision. Thus right half of 
the field of vision is represented in the visual cortex of the 
left cerebral hemisphere and vice versa. It is also important 
to note that impulses from the superior retinal quadrants 
(inferior field of vision) pass to the superior wall of the 
calcarine sulcus, while the inferior retinal quadrants 
(superior field of vision) pass to the inferior wall of the 
calcarine sulcus.
The macular area which is the central area of retina and 
responsible for maximum visual acuity (keenest vision) has 
extensive cortical representation, occupying approximately 
posterior one-third of the visual cortex.
--- Page 409 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
WHITE MATTER OF THE CEREBRUM
The white matter of the cerebrum is a compact mass of a vast 
number of myelinated nerve fibres.
TYPES OF FIBRES IN WHITE MATTER
They are classified into the following three types, on the basis 
of the types of connections they provide:
1. Association fibres.
2. Commissural fibres.
3. Projection fibres.
Association Fibres
The association fibres interconnect the different regions of 
the cerebral cortex in the same hemisphere (intrahemispheric 
fibres). These are of the following two types:
1. Short association fibres, which interconnect the adjacent 
gyri by hooking around the sulcus, hence they are also 
called arcuate fibres.
2. Long association fibres, which travel for long distances 
and interconnect the widely separated gyri, viz. gyri of 
different lobes.
Commissural Fibres
The commissural fibres interconnect the identical cortical 
areas of the two cerebral hemispheres (interhemispheric 
fibres). The bundles of such fibres are termed commissures.
The important commissures of the brain are as follows:
1. Corpus callosum.
2. Anterior commissure.
3. Posterior commissure.
4. Hippocampal commissure.
5. Habenular commissure.
Corpus callosum (Fig. 27.3): The corpus callosum is the 
largest commissure of the brain. It consists of about 100 
million fibres.
External features of corpus callosum: Corpus callosum forms 
a massive arched interhemispheric bridge in the floor of the 
median longitudinal cerebral fissure connecting the medial 
surfaces of the two cerebral hemispheres.
In sagittal section of cerebrum it is seen as C-shaped mass 
of white fibres on the medial surface of the hemisphere 
forming the roof of the lateral ventricle (Fig. 27.3).
The concave inferior aspect of corpus callosum is attached 
with the convex superior aspect of the fornix by septum 
pellucidum.
Parts of the corpus callosum: The corpus callosum is divided 
from before backwards into the following four parts 
(Fig. 27.3A).
1. Genu: It is thick curved anterior extremity of corpus 
callosum which lies 4 cm behind the frontal pole. The 
fibres of genu sweep (curve) forwards on either side into 
the anterior parts of the frontal lobes, forming a fork-
like structure, the forceps minor (Fig. 27.3B).
2. Rostrum: The genu extends downwards and backwards 
as a thin prolongation to join the lamina terminalis 
forming, rostrum of corpus callosum.
3. Trunk: The trunk is the main (middle) part of the 
corpus callosum between its thick anterior (genu) and 
massive posterior (splenium) extremities.
4. Splenium: The splenium is the massive posterior 
extremity of the corpus callosum, lying 6 cm in front of 
the occipital pole. The fibres of the splenium connect 
Genu
Rostrum
Splenium
Fornix
Body
Septum
pellucidum
Forceps minor
Body
Corona radiata
Forceps major
Fig. 27.3 Corpus callosum: A, parts of corpus callosum as 
seen in median sagittal section of the cerebrum; B, fibres of 
corpus callosum as seen in transverse section of cerebrum 
through corpus callosum.
--- Page 410 ---
Cerebrum
the parietal (posterior parts), temporal, and occipital 
lobes of the two hemispheres. The fibres connecting the 
occipital lobes sweep backwards on either side above the 
calcarine sulcus forming a large fork-like structure, the 
forceps major (Fig. 27.3B).
Functions of the corpus callosum: The corpus callosum is 
largely responsible for interhemispheric transfer of 
information which is essential for bilateral responses and 
learning processes.
Anterior commissure: The anterior commissure is a small 
round bundle of white fibres which crosses the midline in 
the upper part of the lamina terminalis, immediately in front 
of the anterior column of the fornix and interventricular 
foramen.
Anterior commissure consists of two components:
1. A large posterior neocortical component, which 
interconnects the lower and anterior parts of the 
temporal lobes.
A smaller anterior paleocortical component, which 
interconnects the olfactory regions of the two hemispheres.
Posterior commissure: The posterior commissure is a 
slender bundle of white fibres which crosses the midline 
through the inferior lamina of the stalk of pineal gland.
Hippocampal commissure (commissure of fornix): Hippo-
campal commissure interconnects the crura of fornix of the 
two sides and thus forms the hippocampal formation.
Habenular commissure: The habenular commissure is a 
slender bundle of white fibres which crosses the midline 
through the superior lamina of the stalk of pineal gland.
Projection Fibres
The projection fibres connect the cerebral cortex to the 
subcortical centres (such as the corpus striatum, thalamus, 
brainstem) and spinal cord. These fibres are of the following 
two types:
1. Corticofugal fibres, which go away from the cortex (cor-
tical efferents) to centres in the other parts of the CNS.
2. Corticopetal fibres, which come to the cerebral cortex 
from the other centres in the CNS.
The projection fibres of neocortex constitute the corona 
radiata and internal capsule while those of allocortex (i.e., 
archicortex and paleocortex) constitute the fimbria and
fornix.
The most important bundles of projection fibres are: 
internal capsule and fornix.
Internal Capsule (Fig. 27.4)
The internal capsule is a compact bundle of projection fibres 
between the thalamus and caudate nucleus medially and the 
lentiform nucleus laterally. It consists of ascending and 
descending nerve fibres which connect the cerebral cortex to 
the brainstem and spinal cord.
The afferent (sensory) fibres pass up from thalamus to the 
cerebral cortex and efferent (motor) fibres pass down from 
the cerebral cortex to the cerebral peduncle of the midbrain.
These sensory and motor fibres of internal capsule are 
mainly responsible for the sensory and motor innervation of 
the opposite half of the body.
N.B. The sensory fibres radiate from thalamus in different 
directions to reach the widespread areas of the cerebral 
cortex and constitute the thalamic radiation.
Because of high concentration of motor and sensory nerve 
fibres within the internal capsule, even a small lesion in 
internal capsule may produce widespread paralytic effects 
and sensory loss in the opposite half of the body.
Clinical correlation
Shape and parts of internal capsule
In a horizontal section of the cerebral hemisphere, the 
internal capsule appears as a V-shaped compact bundle of 
white fibres with its concavity directed laterally (Fig. 27.4).
Fig. 27.4 Main components of internal capsule and their 
constituent fibres (yellow = thalamocortical, green = cortico-
pontine fibres, red = corticonuclear and corticospinal fibres, 
violet = corticorubral fibres).
Auditory radiation
(inferior thalamic
radiation)
Corticorubral
tract
Lentiform
nucleus
Superior thalamic
radiation
Anterior thalamic
radiation
Corticonuclear
and corticospinal
(head and neck)
Head of caudate
nucleus
Corticospinal
fibres (upper
limb)
Corticospinal
fibres (trunk)
Thalamus
Corticospinal
fibres (lower
limb)
Medial geniculate
body
Lateral geniculate
body
Optic radiation
(posterior thalamic
radiation)
--- Page 411 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
The internal capsule is divided into the following five 
parts (Fig. 27.4):
1. Anterior limb—between the head of caudate nucleus 
and the anterior part of the lentiform nucleus.
2. Posterior limb—between the thalamus and the posterior 
part of the lentiform nucleus.
3. Genu—the bend between the anterior and posterior 
limbs with concavity of the bend facing laterally.
4. Retrolentiform part—behind the lentiform nucleus.
5. Sublentiform part—below the lentiform nucleus.
Constituent fibres of internal capsule (Fig. 27.4)
The constituent motor and sensory fibres in different parts 
of the internal capsule are summarized in Table 27.1 and 
shown in Figure 27.4.
Table 27.1 Constituent motor and sensory fibres in different 
parts of the internal capsule
Part
Motor fibres
Sensory fibres
Anterior limb
Corticopontine fibres
Anterior thalamic 
radiation
Genu
Corticopontine fibres
Corticonuclear and 
corticospinal fibres for 
head and neck
Superior thalamic 
radiation (anterior 
part only)
Posterior limb
Corticopontine fibres
Corticospinal 
(pyramidal) fibres for 
upper limb, trunk and 
lower limb
Corticorubral 
(extrapyramidal) fibres
Superior thalamic 
radiation
Retrolentiform 
part
Corticopontine fibres
Posterior thalamic 
radiation (optic 
radiation)
Sublentiform 
part
Corticopontine fibres
Inferior thalamic 
radiation (auditory 
radiation)
Arterial supply of internal capsule
The different parts of the internal capsule are supplied by the 
following arteries:
1. Anterior limb: by medial striate branches of the anterior 
cerebral artery and lateral striate branches of the middle 
cerebral artery.
Genu: by recurrent artery of the Heubner or direct 
branches from internal carotid artery.
3. Posterior limb: by lateral striate branches of the middle 
cerebral artery and branches of the anterior choroidal 
artery.
Lesions of internal capsule: The internal capsule is 
frequently involved in the cerebrovascular disorders.
The most common cause of arterial hemorrhage is 
atheromatous degeneration of an artery in individuals 
suffering from high blood pressure.
The hemorrhage commonly occurs due to rupture of the 
Charcot’s artery, the larger lateral striate branch of the 
middle cerebral artery (also called Charcot’s artery of 
cerebral hemorrhage), which supplies the posterior limb of 
the internal capsule.
Damage to the internal capsule caused by hemorrhage or 
infarction, leads to loss of sensations and spastic paralysis 
of the opposite half of the body (contralateral hemiplegia).
Clinical correlation
N.B. Rupture of Charcot’s artery of cerebral hemorrhage is 
the most common cause of the hemiplegia.
Fornix
The fornix is described in detail in Chapter 28.
LATERAL VENTRICLES
There are two lateral ventricles, one in each cerebral 
hemisphere. Each lateral ventricle is a C-shaped cavity lined 
with ependyma within each cerebral hemisphere.
Each lateral ventricle communicates with the 3rd ventricle 
through the interventricular foramen (of Monro).
PARTS OF THE LATERAL VENTRICLE (Fig. 27.5)
For descriptive purposes, each lateral ventricle is divided into 
four parts, viz.
1. Central part.
2. Anterior horn.
3. Posterior horn.
4. Inferior horn.
Central part: The central part or body lies mostly within the 
parietal lobe and extends from interventricular foramen in 
front to the splenium of the corpus callosum behind. In 
coronal section, it is triangular and presents floor, roof, and 
medial wall.
The floor from lateral to medial side is formed by: body of 
caudate nucleus, stria terminalis, thalamostriate vein, and 
thalamus. The roof is formed by the body of the corpus 
callosum and the medial wall is formed by septum pellucidum.
Anterior horn: It is the anterior extension of the central part 
into the frontal lobe and lies in front of interventricular 
foramen and behind the posterior surface of the genu of 
corpus callosum.
It is triangular in coronal section and presents roof, floor, 
and anterior, medial, and lateral walls.
--- Page 412 ---
Cerebrum
The roof is formed by anterior part of the body of corpus 
callosum, the floor by rostrum of corpus callosum, anterior 
wall by genu of corpus callosum. The medial and lateral walls 
Fig. 27.5 Ventricular system of the brain showing different 
parts of lateral ventricle: A, lateral view; B, superior view.
Vertical line at the level of
interventricular foramen
Anterior horn of
lateral ventricle
Interventricular
foramen
Third ventricle
Inferior horn of
lateral ventricle
Central part of
lateral ventricle
Collateral
trigone
Posterior horn of
lateral ventricle
Cerebral aqueduct
Fourth ventricle
Central canal
Third ventricle
Anterior horn of
lateral ventricle
Inferior horn of
lateral ventricle
Body of 
lateral ventricle
Posterior horn of
lateral ventricle
Cerebral aqueduct
Fourth ventricle
Central canal
are formed by septum pellucidum and head of caudate 
nucleus, respectively.
Posterior horn: It is the backward extension of the central 
part into the occipital pole.
In coronal section, the posterior horn presents: medial 
wall, lateral wall, roof, and floor.
The medial wall consists of two convexities, the upper 
one—the bulb of posterior horn is formed by the forceps 
major of corpus callosum and the lower one—the calcar avis
is formed by the calcarine sulcus. The roof, lateral wall, and 
floor are formed by the tapetum of the corpus callosum.
Inferior horn: It is the largest horn and is considered as 
direct continuation of the main ventricular cavity into the 
temporal lobe.
In coronal section, it appears as a transverse slit and 
presents the roof and the floor. The floor is formed medially 
by the hippocampus and laterally by collateral eminence. 
The lateral part of the roof is formed by tapetum of the 
corpus callosum and medial part by the tail of caudate 
nucleus and stria terminalis.
N.B. The area where inferior and posterior horns diverge is 
called collateral trigone.
CHOROID PLEXUS AND CHOROID FISSURE
On the medial aspect of the cerebral hemisphere, along the 
C-shaped line between the diencephalon and hemisphere, 
the medial wall of the central part and inferior horn of the 
lateral ventricle is made up of only ependyma. The pia mater 
covering the ependyma along this C-shaped line is 
invaginated by the fringe-like tuft of capillaries of blood 
vessels into the central part and inferior horn to form the 
choroid plexus of the lateral ventricle. The line of 
invagination of the choroid plexus into the lateral ventricle is 
called choroid fissure.
--- Page 413 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
Golden Facts to Remember
  Largest part of the brain
Cerebrum
  Most conspicuous cerebral sulcus
Lateral sulcus (of Sylvius)
  Dominant cerebral hemisphere (in right handed 
people)
Left cerebral hemisphere
  Largest bundle of commissural fibres of the brain
Corpus callosum
  Most important and largest bundle of projection 
fibres of the brain
Internal capsule
  Most common cause of hemiplegia
Infarction of the posterior limb of the internal 
capsule
  Largest part of the lateral ventricle
Central part or body
  Largest horn of the lateral ventricle
Inferior horn
  Most variable horn of the lateral ventricle
Posterior horn
  Island of Reil
Insula (also called central lobe)
  Most marked structural feature of the visual cortex
Visual stria (of Gennari)
A 57-year-old executive officer with a history of 
hypertension developed paralysis in the left side of his 
body. He was taken to the nearby neurocentre, where on 
examination the neurosurgeon found increased muscle 
tone, increased tendon reflexes and positive Babinski sign 
on the affected side. The sensory examination revealed 
altered sensations on the affected side. The CT scan of his 
head revealed a small lesion in his right cerebral 
hemisphere in the region of the internal capsule.
Questions
1. What did the executive officer suffer from? UMN 
or LMN type of paralysis? Substantiate your answer 
with reasons.
2. Name the parts of the internal capsule and men-
tion the part in which the lesion was likely to be 
located.
3. Which is the most commonly ruptured artery of 
the cerebral hemisphere?
Answers
1. The UMN type of paralysis, because the typical 
features of upper motor neuron (UMN) type of 
paralysis are: increased muscle tone, increased 
tendon reflexes and positive Babinski sign.
2. The internal capsule consists of the following five 
parts: anterior limb, genu, posterior limb, 
sublentiform part, and retrolentiform part. The 
lesion was likely to be located in the posterior limb 
because it contains corticospinal fibres and fibres 
of superior thalamic radiation providing motor 
and sensory innervation to the opposite half of the 
body respectively.
3. Charcot’s artery of cerebral hemorrhage. It is the 
larger lateral striate (lenticulostriate) branch of the 
middle cerebral artery.
Clinical Case Study
--- Page 414 ---
Basal Nuclei and 
Limbic System
CHAPTER
BASAL NUCLEI
The basal nuclei (or ganglia) are large subcortical masses of 
grey matter located inside the white matter in the basal part 
of the cerebral hemisphere.
Anatomically, the term basal ganglia include:
(a) corpus striatum,
(b) claustrum, and
(c) amygdaloid body.
Functionally, basal ganglia also include substantia nigra, red 
nucleus, and subthalamus.
The basal nuclei are important in organizing and 
coordinating motor movements. The major function of the 
basal nuclei is to decrease muscle tone and inhibit unwanted 
muscular activity.
CORPUS STRIATUM
The corpus striatum is situated lateral to the thalamus. 
Topographically, it is almost completely divided into the 
caudate nucleus and the lentiform nucleus by a band of 
nerve fibres, the internal capsule. However, anteroinferior 
ends of these nuclei remain connected by a few bands of grey 
matter across the anterior limb of the internal capsule. These 
bands give it a striated appearance, hence the name corpus 
striatum (Figs 28.1 and 28.2).
The lentiform nucleus consists of two parts: a darker 
lateral part putamen and a medial paler part globus pallidus.
Phylogenetically, corpus striatum forms two distinct 
functional units, the paleostriatum and the neostriatum.
The globus pallidus is relatively ancient and termed 
paleostriatum/pallidum. The caudate nucleus and putamen 
being recent in development, together form the neostriatum/
striatum.
These features of the corpus striatum are summarized in 
Flowchart 28.1.
CAUDATE NUCLEUS
Caudate nucleus is a large comma-shaped mass of grey 
matter, which surrounds the thalamus and is itself 
surrounded by the lateral ventricle. The whole length of its 
convexity projects into the cavity of lateral ventricle.
Fig. 28.1 Corpus striatum: A, as seen from lateral aspect; B, relationship of the corpus striatum to the internal capsule.
Head of caudate
nucleus
Body of caudate
nucleus
Tail of caudate
nucleus
Lentiform
nucleus
Amygdaloid
body
Lentiform
nucleus
Crus cerebri
Caudate nucleus
Fibres of 
internal capsule
Amygdaloid
body
--- Page 415 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
Its rounded anterior part in front of interventricular 
foramen is called its head. The head gradually and 
imperceptibly tapers caudally into the body and then into a 
tail, which merges at its anterior extremity with an almond-
shaped mass of grey matter called amygdaloid body
(Fig. 28.3).
LENTIFORM NUCLEUS
Lentiform nucleus is a large lens-shaped (biconvex) mass of 
grey matter beneath the insula forming the lateral boundary 
of the internal capsule. In horizontal section of cerebrum, it 
appears wedge shaped with broad convex base directed 
laterally.
It is divided into two parts by a vertical plate of white 
matter (external medullary lamina): an outer darker part, the 
putamen and an inner lighter part the globus pallidus.
The larger lateral part, the putamen consists of densely 
packed small cells, and is structurally similar to the caudate 
nucleus.
The globus pallidus is smaller medial part and consists of 
large (motor) cells. It is also known as pallidum as it appears 
pale in section (pallid = pale). The globus pallidus is further 
subdivided by an internal medullary lamina of white matter 
into outer and inner segments.
CONNECTIONS OF CORPUS STRIATUM
The striatum (caudate nucleus and putamen) is the receptive 
part while globus pallidus is the efferent part (outflow 
centre) of the corpus striatum.
The striatum receives fibres mainly from the cerebral 
cortex, thalamus, and substantia nigra. The globus pallidus 
sends fibres to the thalamus, subthalamus, substantia nigra, 
reticular formation, and red nucleus.
Different pathways involve different neurotransmitters, 
which include dopamine, acetylcholine, glutamate, and 
γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA).
CLAUSTRUM
Claustrum is a thin saucer-shaped mass of grey matter 
situated between the putamen and insula.
Its significance is not known.
AMYGDALOID BODY (OR AMYGDALA)
Amygdaloid body is an almond-shaped mass of grey matter 
in the temporal lobe, lying anterosuperior to the tip of 
inferior horn of lateral ventricle. It is situated deep to uncus, 
which serves as a surface landmark for its location.
The fibres arising from amygdaloid body form stria 
terminalis, which follow the inner curve of the caudate 
nucleus and terminate into septal area, anterior perforated 
substance, and anterior hypothalamic nuclei (Fig. 28.3). The 
stria terminalis is the main efferent tract of the amygdaloid 
body.
Developmentally it is related to the basal nuclei but 
functionally it is included in the limbic system, and therefore, 
shares its functions (for details see limbic system on 
page 401).
Thalamus
Tail of caudate nucleus
Lateral and medial
medullary laminae
Globus pallidus
Putamen
Lentiform
nucleus
Claustrum
External capsule
Head of
caudate nucleus
Anterior limb of
internal capsule
Genu of 
internal capsule
Posterior limb of
internal capsule
Fig. 28.2 Corpus striatum, thalamus, claustrum, and internal 
capsule—as seen in horizontal section of the cerebral 
hemisphere.
Flowchart 28.1 Features of the corpus striatum.
Paleostriatum
Neostriatum
Globus pallidus
Lentiform
nucleus
Putamen
Caudate nucleus
Corpus
striatum
Fig. 28.3 Caudate nucleus, amygdaloid body, and stria 
terminalis.
Amygdaloid body
Anterior
perforated
substance
Septal area
Caudate nucleus
Thalamus
Stria terminalis
Anterior
hypothalamic
nuclei
--- Page 416 ---
Basal Nuclei and Limbic System
SUBSTANTIA NIGRA AND RED NUCLEUS
Substantia nigra and red nucleus are described in detail in 
Chapter 24.
SUBTHALAMUS (SUBTHALAMIC NUCLEUS)
This small nucleus in the ventral part of the diencephalon, 
which looks like a biconvex lens in coronal section. It is 
located caudal to the lateral half of the thalamus and 
inferomedial to globus pallidus. It is separated from thalamus 
by a smaller nucleus called zona inserta.
FUNCTIONS OF THE BASAL NUCLEI
The functions of the basal nuclei are as follows:
1. Concerned with planning and programming of 
voluntary movements.
2. Determine how rapidly a movement is to be performed 
and how large the movement must be.
3. Decrease muscle tone and inhibit unwanted muscular 
activity.
4. Regulate the muscle tone and thus help in smoothening 
the voluntary motor activities of the body.
5. Control automatic associated movements, like swinging 
of arms during walking.
6. Control group of movements responsible for emotional 
expression.
7. Control reflex muscular activity.
Lesions of basal ganglia: The lesions of basal ganglia 
result in various forms of unwanted involuntary movements 
and disturbance in the muscle tone. These disorders include 
Parkinsonism chorea, athetosis, and ballismus. The 
Parkinsonism being the commonest disorder is described in 
detail in the following text.
• Parkinsonism (also called Parkinson’s disease/paralysis 
agitans): This disease usually occurs after 50 years of age 
due to deficiency of the neurotransmitter dopamine in the 
corpus striatum following a lesion in substantia nigra and/
or its nigrostriate fibres.
Characteristic features of Parkinsonism:
– Resting tremors.
– Lead-pipe or cogwheel type of muscular rigidity.
– Pill-rolling movements of hands.
– Mask-like face or loss of facial expression.
– Stiff, shuffling gait.
– Stooped posture.
– General slowing-down of movements and absence of 
associated movements, such as arm swinging during 
walking.
Clinical correlation
LIMBIC SYSTEM
The word limbus means ring, the term limbic system is
applied to the parts of the cortical and subcortical structures 
that form a ring around the upper end of the brainstem.
The limbic region was formerly called rhinencephalon 
because of its association to olfaction, but only a small part 
of it is actually concerned with smell.
Phylogenetically, limbic cortex is the oldest part of the 
cerebral cortex and is made up of primitive type of cortical 
tissue called allocortex, which consists of only three layers 
and surrounds the hilum of the cerebral hemisphere.
The limbic system plays a vital role in abstract functions
such as emotions, behavior, drive, and memory.
FUNCTIONS OF THE LIMBIC SYSTEM
The limbic system is functionally associated with the 
following neural activities:
1. Emotional aspects of behavior together with visceral 
responses accompanying these emotions, particularly 
the reactions of fear and anger, and emotions associated 
with sexual behavior which are necessary for:
(a) survival of an individual including procuring of 
food and eating behavior, and
(b) survival of the species including the sexual behavior.
2. Brain mechanisms responsible for recent memory.
3. Integration of olfactory, visceral, and somatic impulses 
reaching the brain.
N.B. Because of visceral responses to activities in the limbic 
system, it is also known as visceral brain. The main object of 
limbic system is to meet the needs of primitive life, i.e., food 
and sex.
COMPONENTS OF THE LIMBIC SYSTEM
A large number of structures of the brain are included in the 
limbic system. However, a fairly accepted list of these 
structures is described here.
Regions of Grey Matter in Limbic System
Cortical Structures
1. Limbic lobe, consisting of cingulate gyrus, isthmus, 
parahippocampal gyms, and uncus (anterior part of the 
parahippocampal gyrus).
2. Hippocampal formation (Fig. 28.4), which includes 
hippocampus (cornu ammonis), dentate gyrus, gyrus 
fasciolaris, and indusium griseum.
Subcortical Nuclei
1. Amygdaloid nuclear complex (also called amygdaloid 
body).
--- Page 417 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
2. Septal region and nuclei.
3. Olfactory areas.
4. Hypothalamus especially the mammillary bodies.
5. Anterior nucleus of thalamus.
Fibre Bundles of the Limbic System
1. Fornix.
2. Mammillothalamic tract.
3. Stria terminalis.
4. Anterior commissure.
AMYGDALOID NUCLEAR COMPLEX
Amygdaloid nuclear complex consists of lateral, central, and 
basal nuclei. It is an almond-shaped mass of grey matter 
underlying the rostral part of the parahippocampal gyrus on 
the anteriormost part of the roof of the inferior horn of 
lateral ventricle.
Posteriorly, amygdaloid body becomes continuous with 
the tail of the caudate nucleus and stria terminalis (Fig. 28.3).
CONNECTIONS
Afferents: Main afferents to amygdaloid body are from 
primary olfactory regions.
Efferents: Stria terminalis forms the main efferent tract of 
the amygdaloid body. It takes a circuitous route along with 
(but not functionally related to) the tail of caudate nucleus 
in close relation to the lateral ventricle until the level of 
anterior commissure, where majority of its fibres terminate 
in the septal area and anterior portion of the hypothalamus 
(Fig. 28.3). The others join the anterior commissure and are 
distributed to the contralateral amygdaloid body.
In general, amygdaloid body plays an important role in 
controlling the somatic responses to internal needs, drives or 
instincts. Since part of it receives olfactory input, it is believed 
that the amygdaloid body plays an important role in smell-
mediated sexual behavior.
Stimulation of amygdaloid body produces excitability, 
fear, and rage. Bilateral damage of amygdaloid body reduces 
fear and increases sexual activity.
N.B. People in late sixties become pervasive in their sexual 
behavior, probably due to atrophy of amygdaloid bodies.
HIPPOCAMPAL FORMATION
The hippocampal formation consists of (a) hippocampus, 
(b) dentate gyrus, (c) indusium griseum, gyrus fasciolaris 
and (d) medial and lateral longitudinal striae.
HIPPOCAMPUS
Hippocampus (also called Ram’s horn or Ammon’s horn) is
an area of cerebral cortex which has rolled into the floor of 
the inferior horn of the lateral ventricle during fetal life. In 
an adult brain, it forms a longitudinal elevation in the floor 
of inferior horn of the lateral ventricle and is continuous 
medially with the subiculum and parahippocampal gyrus.
The name “hippocampus” meaning “sea horse”, is derived 
from its appearance in coronal section.
In the frontal section the hippocampus is C-shaped and 
its outline bears a resemblance to a Ram’s horn, hence the 
name Ram’s horn. It is also called Ammon’s horn after an 
Egyptian deity with Ram’s head. Its anterior extremity is 
expanded and bears few grooves and intervening ridges. 
Because of its resemblance to an animal’s paw it is termed 
pes hippocampi (pes = foot). Traced posteriorly the 
hippocampus gradually narrows and ultimately ends beneath 
the splenium of corpus callosum.
The ventricular surface of the hippocampus is covered 
by a thin layer of white fibres called alveus. The fibres of 
alveus originate in the hippocampal cortex, course towards 
the medial border of hippocampus where they converge to 
form a narrow strip of white matter, the fimbria of 
hippocampus.
Phylogenetically, hippocampus represents the archicortex 
and consists of the following three layers: 
1. Superficial molecular layer.
2. Middle pyramidal cell layer.
3. Deep polymorphic cell layer.
N.B. The parahippocampal cortex (neocortex) is made up 
of six layers. In the region known as subiculum, there is 
gradual transition from six-layered neocortex to the three-
layered archicortex.
Fig. 28.4 Limbic lobe and hippocampal formation 
(AN = anterior nucleus of thalamus, MB = mammillary body, 
MT = mammillothalamic tract).
Hippocampus
Dentate gyrus
Gyrus
fasciolaris
Fornix
Cingulate gyrus
Indusium griseum
Septum pellucidum
Paraterminal
gyrus (part of
septal area)
Olfactory bulb
Amygdaloid body
Uncus
Parahippocampal
gyrus
--- Page 418 ---
Basal Nuclei and Limbic System
Fig. 28.5 Main parts of the fornix.
Connections
Afferents: Hippocampus receives fibres mainly from 
entorhinal area (area 28).
Efferents: The fornix is the main efferent tract of the 
hippocampus.
The fibres leaving the hippocampus pass to:
(a) the opposite hippocampus through the commissure of 
fornix/hippocampal commissure,
(b) the septal and anterior hypothalamic regions, and
(c) the mammillary body, which sends impulses to cingulate 
gyrus through anterior nucleus of thalamus.
Functions of Hippocampus
1. Formerly hippocampus was regarded as the part of 
olfactory system but it has no direct connections with 
the sense of smell in man.
2. In man it is an integrative centre, which influences 
endocrine and visceral functions and emotional states 
through its connections with hypothalamus, septal 
nuclei, and the cingulate gyrus.
It plays an important role in recent memory.
DENTATE GYRUS, INDUSIUM GRISEUM, AND MEDIAL 
AND LATERAL LONGITUDINAL STRIAE
In the fetal brain, the dentate gyrus develops as a further 
extension of the hippocampus and occupies the interval 
between the hippocampus and the parahippocampal gyri, 
lying deep to fimbria. Its surface is toothed, hence the name 
dentate gyrus. When traced anteriorly, dentate gyrus runs 
medially across the inferior surface of the uncus. This part is 
called tail of dentate gyrus. The posterior end of dentate 
gyrus is continuous with the splenial gyrus or gyrus 
fasciolaris, which continues as a thin layer of grey matter 
over the corpus callosum called indusium griseum.
The indusium griseum is the vestigial grey matter and 
contains two delicate longitudinal bands of fibres buried in 
it, the medial and lateral longitudinal striae.
FORNIX
The fornix is a large bundle of projection fibres, which 
connects the hippocampus with the mammillary body. It 
constitutes the sole efferent system of the hippocampus 
(Fig. 28.5).
On the medial surface of the cerebral hemisphere, it is 
seen as an arched prominent bundle of white fibres below 
the corpus callosum, along the lower border of septum 
pellucidum.
There is one fornix in each cerebral hemisphere but two 
are so closely related/fused beneath the middle of the body 
of corpus callosum that they are usually described as a single 
structure.
Origin, Course, and Distribution of the Fibres
The fibres of fornix arise mainly from the pyramidal cells 
of the hippocampus and form a thin layer of white fibres 
on its ventricular surface called alveus.
The fibres of alveus collect on the medial margin of 
hippocampus to form a narrow strip of white matter, the 
fimbria, lying flat over the dentate gyrus. The fimbria 
becomes a rounded band, the crus of fornix as it arches 
upwards, medially and forwards underneath the splenium of 
c orpus callosum. The two crura, one of each hemisphere, 
curving over the thalamus, converge and unite in the midline 
beneath the trunk of corpus callosum to form the body of 
fornix.
Anteriorly, the body of fornix divides into two columns, the 
columns of fornix. Each column of fornix arches downwards 
towards the anterior commissure, and forms the anterior 
boundary of interventricular foramen. Then it curves 
posteriorly through the hypothalamus to end in the 
mammillary body. These fibres being located posterior to 
anterior commissure are referred to as postcommissural 
fornix. Some fibres of column pass in front of anterior 
commissure to end in the septal area and anterior hypothalamic 
region, etc. to constitute the precommissural fornix.
To summarize, the main parts of the fornix are fimbria, 
crura, body, and anterior columns (Fig. 28.5).
N.B. Fornix is the only tract of the cerebrum, which contains 
all the three types of its fibres such as projection fibres, 
commissural fibres, and association fibres.
MAMMILLOTHALAMIC TRACT
Mammillothalamic tract, also called, Félix Vicq d’Azyr, is a 
prominent bundle of fibres, which carry impulses from 
mammillary body to the anterior, nucleus of the thalamus.
Commissure of
fornix
(hippocampal
commissure)
Posterior
columns of
fornix
Fimbria
Dentate gyrus
Hippocampus
Mammillary
bodies
Anterior
columns of
fornix
--- Page 419 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
Golden Facts to Remember
  Most common disease of the basal nuclei
Parkinsonism
  Great efferent pathway of hippocampus
Fornix
  Ammon’s horn/Ram’s horn
Hippocampus
  Main efferent tract of the amygdaloid body
Stria terminalis
  Two main needs of primitive life 
Food and sex
  Neural tract containing all 3 types of white fibres 
of brain
Fornix
A 65-year-old patient presented with resting tremors of 
the hands, mask-like facies, shuffling gait. A careful 
physical examination by a neurologist revealed 
increased muscle tone and cogwheel type of rigidity of 
the joints. The patient had a stooped posture and his 
speech was slurred. It was also observed that he lacked 
associated movements (i.e., no swinging of arms during 
walking). A clinical diagnosis of Parkinsonism was 
made.
Questions
1. What is the anatomical basis of Parkinsonism?
2. Deficiency of which neurotransmitter is found in 
this condition?
3. Enumerate characteristic clinical features of 
Parkinsonism.
Answers
1. Parkinsonism occurs due to degeneration of 
substantia nigra or nigrostriate fibres.
2. Dopamine.
3. The characteristic clinical features of Parkinsonism 
are mask-like facies, pill-rolling movements of 
hands with resting tremors (i.e., slight shaking of 
hands when person is not performing a task), 
stooped posture, and stiff shuffling gait.
Clinical Case Study
--- Page 420 ---
Blood Supply of
the Brain
CHAPTER
The brain is one of the most metabolically active organs of 
the body as it depends on aerobic metabolism of glucose.
Although the brain constitutes only 2% (1/50) of the total 
body weight, it receives 20% (1/5) of the total cardiac output 
and consumes 20% of the total O2 used by the body.
The cerebrovascular diseases (thrombosis, embolism, 
and hemorrhage) are the third most common cause of death 
and the neurological signs depend on the site of lesion. 
Therefore, an adequate knowledge of the blood supply of the 
brain is essential for proper diagnosis and treatment of these 
diseases.
ARTERIES OF THE BRAIN
The blood supply to the brain is provided by four arteries: 
two vertebral arteries and two internal carotid arteries 
(Fig. 29.1).
The two vertebral arteries enter the skull through the 
foramen magnum and unite at the lower border of the pons 
to form the basilar artery, which ascends in the midline on 
the ventral surface of the pons and at its upper border 
terminates by dividing into right and left posterior cerebral 
arteries.
Each internal carotid artery enters the cranial cavity 
through carotid canal and the superior part of the foramen 
lacerum. It then takes a sinuous course through the cavernous 
sinus, pierces the dural roof of the sinus, and ends 
immediately lateral to the optic chiasma in the region of 
anterior perforated substance by dividing into a larger 
middle cerebral artery and a smaller anterior cerebral artery.
Circle of Willis (Circulus Arteriosus)
The branches of basilar and internal carotid arteries 
anastomose at the base of brain around the interpeduncular 
fossa forming a six-sided polygon of arteries called circulus 
arteriosus or circle of Willis (Fig. 29.2). The circle of Willis 
lies in the interpeduncular subarachnoid cistern and
contributes most of the arterial blood supply to the brain.
Formation
The circle of Willis is formed:
Anteriorly, by the anterior communicating and the 
anterior cerebral arteries.
Posteriorly, by the basilar artery dividing into two posterior 
cerebral arteries.
Laterally on each side, by the posterior communicating 
artery connecting the internal carotid artery with the 
posterior cerebral artery.
Circle of
Willis
Basilar
artery
Internal carotid
artery
Middle cerebral
artery
Anterior cerebral artery
Vertebral artery
Arch of
aorta
Right common
carotid artery
Right subclavian
artery
Brachiocephalic
trunk
Left common
carotid artery
Left subclavian
artery
Fig. 29.1 Four arteries supplying the brain.
--- Page 421 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
Functional Significance
Normally there is little or no mixing of blood streams of 
(a) two vertebral arteries in the basilar artery, (b) two 
anterior cerebral arteries in the anterior communicating 
artery, and (c) internal carotid and posterior cerebral arteries 
in the posterior communicating artery. Therefore, right half 
of the brain is supplied by right vertebral and right internal 
carotid arteries and left half of the brain is supplied by left 
vertebral and left internal carotid arteries.
However, if one of the major arteries forming the circle of 
Willis is blocked, the circle of Willis provides the various 
alternative routes for collateral circulation like an arterial 
traffic circle.
• Congenital cerebral aneurysms: These occur mostly at 
the sites where two arteries join in the formation of the 
circle of Willis. The basic abnormality at these points is the 
congenital deficiency of the tunica media (elastic tissue) 
in the arterial wall. The aneurysms are berry shaped, 
hence they are generally termed as berry aneurysms.
• Subarachnoid 
hemorrhage: 
subarachnoid 
hemorrhage commonly, but not exclusively, results from 
rupture 
congenital 
berry 
aneurysms 
interpeduncular cistern.
The subarachnoid hemorrhage produces a sudden 
severe pain in head followed by mental confusion. The 
death may quickly occur, or the patient may survive the 
first bleeding only to die a few days or weeks later.
Clinical correlation
Branches of the Cranial Part of Vertebral Artery
These are as follows:
1. Posterior spinal artery (first intracranial branch) arises 
from vertebral artery and sometimes from posterior 
inferior cerebellar artery. It passes downwards on the 
posterior surface of the spinal cord after dividing into 
two branches; one along the medial side and the other 
along the lateral side of the dorsal roots of the spinal 
nerves.
2. Posterior inferior cerebellar artery is the largest branch 
of the cranial (4th) part of the vertebral artery. It arises 
near the lower end of the olive, winds backwards around 
the medulla oblongata, and then ascends to the 
pontomedullary junction.
3. Anterior spinal artery is a small branch. It arises near 
the termination of the vertebral artery. It descends in 
front of the medulla and unites with its fellow of the 
opposite side—the lower end of the olive to form a 
single median trunk that descends along the anterior 
longitudinal fissure of the spinal cord.
4. Meningeal branches are small and supply the dura mater 
of the posterior cranial fossa.
5. Medullary arteries are several minute vessels which 
supply the medulla oblongata.
Branches of the Basilar Artery
These are as follows:
1. Pontine branches are numerous short, slender 
paramedian vessels, which pierce the pons to supply it.
2. Anterior-inferior cerebellar artery arises close to the 
lower border of the pons and runs backwards, and 
laterally usually ventral to the 7th and 8th cranial 
nerves. Then it forms a loop over the flocculus of the 
cerebellum and peeps into the internal acoustic meatus 
for a variable distance lying below the 7th and 8th 
cranial nerves. After exit from the meatus, it supplies 
the anterolateral portion of the inferior surface of the 
cerebellum.
3. Labyrinthine artery is a long slender branch which 
arises either from basilar artery or from anterior-inferior 
cerebellar artery. It accompanies the vestibulocochlear 
nerve and enters the internal auditory meatus to supply 
the internal ear. It is an end artery.
4. Superior cerebellar artery arises close to the superior 
border of the pons, runs laterally below the oculomotor 
nerve (which is interposed between this artery and the 
posterior cerebral artery) and winds round the cerebral 
peduncle below the trochlear nerve to reach the superior 
surface of the cerebellum, which it supplies.
5. Posterior cerebral artery passes laterally along the 
superior border of the pons parallel to the superior 
cerebellar artery, curves around the midbrain to reach 
Internal
carotid artery
Anterior communicating artery
Anterior cerebral artery
Middle cerebral artery
Posterior
communicating artery
Posterior cerebral artery
Labyrinthine artery
Anterior inferior
cerebellar artery
Posterior inferior
cerebellar artery
Vertebral artery
Superior
cerebellar artery
Fig. 29.2 Circle of Willis (AS = anterior spinal artery, LS = lateral 
striate artery, M  =  medullary branches, MN  =  meningeal 
branches, MS = medial striate arteries, P = pontine branches, 
PC  =  posterior choroidal artery, PS  =  posterior spinal artery, 
R = recurrent artery of Heubner, AC = anterior choroidal artery).
--- Page 422 ---
Blood Supply of the Brain
the medial surface of the cerebral hemisphere beneath 
the splenium of corpus callosum. The artery gives off 
central branches into the ventral surface of the midbrain 
and temporal lobe of the corresponding cerebral 
hemisphere. Then it passes towards the occipital pole 
giving cortical branches.
Branches of the Cerebral Part of Internal Carotid Artery
These are as follows:
1. Ophthalmic artery arises from internal carotid artery 
immediately after it comes out of cavernous sinus and 
makes a U-shaped bend. The ophthalmic artery enters 
the orbit through optic canal to supply structures of the 
orbit including eyeball.
2. Posterior communicating artery arises close to the 
termination of the internal carotid artery. It runs 
backwards and anastomoses with the proximal part of 
the posterior cerebral artery.
3. Anterior choroidal artery is a long slender branch, 
which arises just distal to the origin of the posterior 
communicating artery. It courses backwards above and 
along the optic tract to enter the inferior horn of the 
lateral ventricle through the choroid fissure to end in the 
choroid plexus.
 
Due to its long subarachnoid course and a relatively small 
lumen, the anterior choroidal artery is most susceptible to 
thrombosis and is often referred to as artery of cerebral 
thrombosis.
4. Anterior cerebral artery is a smaller terminal branch of 
the internal carotid artery. It runs forwards and medially 
above the optic nerve to the commencement of the 
median longitudinal cerebral fissure, where it comes 
very close to its fellow of the opposite side and gets 
joined with it by a short transverse anterior 
communicating artery. The anterior cerebral artery then 
curves around the genu of corpus callosum.
The branches given off just distal to the anterior 
communicating artery supply the medial part of the 
orbital surface of the frontal lobe.
The artery continues along the upper surface of the 
corpus callosum and gives branches which supply the 
whole of the medial surfaces of the hemisphere above the 
corpus callosum as far back as the parieto-occipital sulcus.
5. Middle cerebral artery is the larger terminal branch of 
the internal carotid artery. It appears to be the direct 
continuation of the internal carotid artery and carries 
about 30% of the carotid blood flow.
The middle cerebral artery first runs laterally in the 
stem of the lateral sulcus and then turns backwards and 
upwards in the posterior ramus of the lateral sulcus, 
where it breaks up into frontal, parietal, and temporal 
branches, which emerge from the lateral sulcus and run 
towards the areas of their supply.
The branches of main arteries supplying the brain are 
summarized in Table 29.1.
It is interesting to note from Table 29.1 that each main 
artery supplying the brain gives off five sets of branches,
thus making a total of 15 sets, out of which there are three 
pairs of cerebral arteries (anterior, middle, and posterior) 
and three pairs of cerebellar arteries (posteroinferior, 
anteroinferior, and superior).
Cerebral thrombosis most commonly affects the middle 
cerebral artery or its main branches because it is a direct 
continuation of the internal carotid artery.
Clinical correlation
ARTERIAL SUPPLY OF CEREBRUM
The cerebrum is supplied by three pairs of cerebral arteries, 
viz. anterior, middle, and posterior.
Branching Pattern of Cerebral Arteries
The cerebral arteries give three types of branches, viz.
1. Cortical branches.
2. Central branches.
3. Choroidal branches.
Table 29.1 Branches of the main arteries of the brain
Cerebral part of internal carotid artery
Cranial (fourth) part of vertebral artery
Basilar artery
Ophthalmic artery
Meningeal arteries
Anterior inferior cerebellar artery
Anterior cerebral artery
Anterior spinal artery
Labyrinthine artery
Middle cerebral artery
Posterior spinal artery
Pontine arteries
Posterior communicating artery
Posterior inferior cerebellar artery
Superior cerebellar artery
Anterior choroidal artery
Medullary arteries
Posterior cerebral artery
--- Page 423 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
Cortical branches: The cortical branches supply the outer 
portion of the cerebrum. The cortical vessels freely 
anastomose and form a network in the pia mater on the 
surface of the cerebral cortex. From this network branches 
arise and pierce the cortex at right angle. Once they enter 
the cortex, they become the end arteries. There are two 
types of these end arteries: (a) short, which confine 
themselves only to the cortex and (b) long, which pass 
through the cortex and reach the outer portion of the white 
matter.
Central branches: They are numerous slender thin-walled 
perforating branches, which supply the centrally located 
parts of the cerebrum, viz. corpus striatum, internal capsule, 
etc. They are end arteries. The central arteries arise in the 
region of arterial circle of Willis, and are arranged into the 
following four groups:
1. Anteromedial group.
2. Anterolateral group (lateral striate arteries).
3. Posteromedial group.
4. Posterolateral group.
Choroidal arteries: The choroidal arteries form a network of 
capillaries which project into the ventricles after invaginating 
the layers of pia mater and ependyma forming choroid 
plexuses. They are:
1. Anterior choroidal artery.
2. Posterior choroidal artery.
ARTERIAL SUPPLY OF DIFFERENT 
SURFACES OF CEREBRAL HEMISPHERE
Arterial Supply of Superolateral Surface (Fig. 29.3A)
The superolateral surface of the cerebral hemisphere is 
supplied by the following arteries:
1. Middle cerebral artery: Most of the superolateral 
surface (about 2/3rd) is supplied by the middle cerebral 
artery. The region of cerebral cortex supplied by it 
includes the greater parts of primary motor and 
sensory areas, and frontal eye field. In the left 
(dominant) hemisphere it includes the Broca and 
Wernicke’s speech areas.
2. Anterior cerebral artery: A narrow strip of the cerebral 
cortex (about 2.5 cm in width) adjoining superomedial 
border up to the parieto-occipital sulcus is supplied by 
anterior cerebral artery. The upper parts of primary 
motor and sensory areas lie in this region.
3. Posterior cerebral artery: A narrow strip along the 
lower border of temporal lobe (excluding temporal 
pole) and occipital lobe are supplied by posterior 
cerebral artery. The posterior parts of visual area fall in 
this area.
Arterial Supply of Medial Surface (Fig. 29.3B)
The medial surface of the cerebral hemisphere is supplied by 
the following arteries:
1. Anterior cerebral artery: Most of the medial surface 
(anterior 2/3rd) is supplied by the anterior cerebral 
artery. The region of cerebral cortex supplied includes 
the parts of motor and sensory areas (paracentral lobule) 
concerned with perineum, leg, and foot.
2. Middle cerebral artery: Temporal pole of the temporal 
lobe is supplied by the middle cerebral artery.
3. Posterior cerebral artery: Occipital lobe is supplied by 
the posterior cerebral artery. The area supplied includes 
the visual cortex.
Arterial Supply of Inferior Surface (Fig. 29.3C)
The inner surface of the cerebral hemisphere is supplied by 
the following arteries:
1. Posterior cerebral artery: Most of the inferior surface 
except the temporal pole is supplied by the posterior 
cerebral artery.
2. Middle cerebral artery: Lateral part of the orbital sur-
face of the frontal lobe and temporal pole of the tempo-
ral lobe are supplied by the middle cerebral artery.
3. Anterior cerebral artery: Medial part of the orbital 
surface of the frontal lobe is supplied by the anterior 
cerebral artery.
Fig. 29.3 Arterial supply of the different surfaces of the 
cerebral hemisphere: A, superolateral surface; B, medial 
surface; C, inferior surface.
Anterior cerebral artery
Middle cerebral artery
Posterior cerebral artery
--- Page 424 ---
Blood Supply of the Brain
N.B. Each surface of the cerebral hemisphere is supplied 
by three cerebral arteries, viz. anterior, middle, and posterior.
Most of the superolateral surface is supplied by middle 
cerebral artery, most of the medial surface by the anterior 
cerebral artery, and most of the inferior surface by the 
posterior cerebral artery.
Occlusion of middle cerebral artery: The occlusion of 
middle cerebral artery occurs commonly. It produces the 
following signs and symptoms:
• Contralateral hemiplegia and hemianesthesia involving 
mainly the face and arm, due to involvement of most of 
the primary motor and sensory areas.
• Aphasia, if left dominant hemisphere is involved—due to 
involvement of motor and sensory speech areas.
• Contralateral homonymous hemianopia due to involvement 
of optic radiation.
Clinical correlation
ARTERIAL SUPPLY OF OTHER PARTS OF
THE BRAIN
The arterial supply of the other parts of the brain as are 
follows:
1. The corpus striatum and internal capsule are supplied 
mainly by the central branches of middle cerebral artery 
and to some extent by the central branches of anterior 
cerebral artery.
2. The thalamus is supplied mainly by the central branches 
of posterior communicating, posterior cerebral, and 
basilar arteries.
3. The midbrain is supplied by the posterior cerebral, 
superior cerebellar, and basilar arteries.
4. The pons is supplied by the basilar, superior cerebellar, 
and anterior inferior cerebellar arteries.
5. The medulla oblongata is supplied by the vertebral, 
anterior spinal, posterior spinal, posterior inferior 
cerebellar, and basilar arteries.
6. The cerebellum is supplied by the superior, anterior 
inferior, and posterior inferior cerebellar arteries.
VENOUS DRAINAGE OF THE BRAIN
The veins of the brain drain into the intracranial dural 
venous sinuses, which eventually drains into the internal 
jugular veins of the neck.
The characteristic features of the venous drainage of the 
brain are as follows:
1. The venous return in the brain does not follow the 
arterial pattern.
2. The veins of the brain are extremely thin walled due to 
absence of muscular tissue in their walls.
3. The veins of the brain possess no valves.
4. The veins of the brain run mainly in the subarachnoid 
space.
The veins of the brain comprise cerebral veins, cerebellar 
veins, and veins of the brainstem.
CEREBRAL VEINS
The cerebral veins are divided into external (superficial) and 
internal cerebral veins, which drain the external surfaces and 
the internal regions of the cerebral hemisphere, respectively.
External Cerebral Veins
The external cerebral veins drain the surface (cortex) of the 
hemisphere and are divided into three groups, viz.
1. Superior.
2. Middle.
3. Inferior.
Superior cerebral veins (Fig. 29.4): The superior cerebral veins 
are about 8–12 and drain the upper parts of the superolateral 
and medial surfaces of the cerebral hemisphere. They ascend 
upwards, pierce the arachnoid mater, and traverse the subdural 
space to enter the superior sagittal sinus.
The anterior veins open at right angle, while the posterior 
open obliquely against the flow of bloodstream in the 
superior sagittal sinus, thereby preventing their collapse by 
increased CSF pressure.
Middle cerebral veins: The middle cerebral veins are four, 
two on each side: superficial middle cerebral vein and deep 
middle cerebral vein.
The superficial middle cerebral vein (Fig. 29.4) lies 
superficially in the lateral sulcus. Anteriorly, it runs forwards 
to drain into the cavernous sinus while posteriorly, it 
communicates with the superior sagittal sinus via superior 
Superficial
middle cerebral vein
Sigmoid sinus
Transverse
sinus
Superior
anastomotic
vein (of Trolard)
Inferior
anastomotic
vein (of Labbe)
Superior sagittal sinus
Superior cerebral
veins
Fig. 29.4 Veins on the superolateral surface of the cerebral 
hemisphere.
--- Page 425 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
anastomotic vein (of Trolard) and with the transverse sinus 
via inferior anastomotic vein (of Labbe).
The deep middle cerebral vein lies deep in the lateral 
sulcus on the insula along with middle cerebral artery. It 
runs downwards and forwards and joins the anterior cerebral 
vein to form the basal vein.
Inferior cerebral veins: The inferior cerebral veins are many 
in number but smaller in size. They drain the inferior surface 
and lower parts of medial and superolateral surfaces of the 
cerebral hemisphere into nearby intracranial dural venous 
sinuses, e.g., transverse sinus.
Other Veins
Anterior cerebral vein
It accompanies the anterior cerebral artery around the 
corpus callosum and drains the parts of medial surface, 
which cannot be drained into the superior and inferior 
sagittal sinuses.
Basal vein (of Rosenthal)
It is formed at the base of the brain in the region of anterior 
perforated substance by the union of three veins: anterior 
cerebral, deep middle cerebral, and striate veins. The striate 
veins emerge from the anterior perforated substance.
The basal vein runs posteriorly around the midbrain, 
medial to the uncus and parahippocampus, and terminates 
into the great cerebral vein (of Galen) below the splenium of 
corpus callosum.
Besides the formative three veins, the basal vein receives 
the tributaries from:
1. Cerebral peduncle.
2. Uncus and parahippocampus.
3. Structures of interpeduncular fossa.
4. Optic tract and olfactory trigone.
5. Inferior horn of the lateral ventricle.
Internal Cerebral Veins
There are two internal cerebral veins located one on either 
side of midline in the tela choroidea of the 3rd ventricle 
(Fig. 29.5).
Each internal cerebral vein is formed at the interventricular 
foramen (of Monro) by the union of three veins: 
thalamostriate, septal, and choroidal. The two internal 
cerebral veins run posteriorly, one on either side of midline, 
between the two layers of tela choroidea of 3rd ventricle and 
unite together beneath the splenium of corpus callosum to 
form the great cerebral vein (of Galen), which empties into 
the straight sinus.
The thalamostriate, septal, and choroidal veins are the 
most important deep veins of the cerebrum. As their names 
imply, the thalamostriate (striothalamic) vein drains the 
thalamus and basal ganglia; the septal vein drains the septum 
Fig. 29.5 Formation, course, and tributaries of the internal 
cerebral veins.
Internal cerebral
veins
Basal vein
Great cerebral vein (of Galen)
Tela choroidea
of third ventricle
Choroidal
vein
Thalamostriate
vein
Septal vein
Septum pellucidum
Corpus callosum
pellucidum, and the choroidal vein drains the choroids 
plexus.
Great Cerebral Vein (of Galen)
Great cerebral vein is a single vein (about 2 cm in length). It 
is formed by the union of two internal cerebral veins below 
and behind the splenium of corpus callosum. It immediately 
receives the two basal veins and after a short backward 
course it joins the inferior sagittal sinus to form the straight 
sinus.
The tributaries of the great cerebral vein are:
1. Internal cerebral veins.
2. Basal veins.
3. Veins from colliculi (tectum of midbrain).
4. Veins from cerebellum and adjoining parts of the 
occipital lobes of the cerebrum.
VENOUS DRAINAGE OF DIFFERENT 
SURFACES OF CEREBRAL HEMISPHERE
Venous Drainage of Superolateral Surface (Fig. 29.4)
Superolateral surface of the cerebral hemisphere is drained 
by the following veins:
1. Superior cerebral veins: They drain the upper part into 
the superior sagittal sinus.
--- Page 426 ---
Blood Supply of the Brain
2. Inferior cerebral veins: They drain the lower part into 
the superficial middle cerebral vein, however some from 
the posteroinferior part drain into the transverse sinus.
Venous Drainage of Inferior Surface
Inferior surface of the cerebral hemisphere is drained by the 
inferior cerebral veins:
1. Inferior cerebral veins from the orbital part: They drain 
into the superficial, middle cerebral, and anterior 
cerebral veins.
2. Inferior cerebral veins from the tentorial part: They 
drain into:
(a) venous sinuses at the base of skull, viz. cavernous, 
superior petrosal, straight and transverse sinuses, 
(b) superficial middle cerebral vein, which drains into 
cavernous sinus and basal vein, which drains into 
the straight sinus.
Venous Drainage of Medial Surface
Medial surface of the cerebral hemisphere is drained by the 
following veins:
1. Superior cerebral veins: They drain the upper part into 
superior sagittal sinus.
2. Inferior cerebral veins: They drain the lower part into 
the inferior sagittal sinus.
3. Some of the veins from the posterior part: These veins 
drain into the great cerebral vein.
4. Anterior cerebral vein: It drains the anterior part.
N.B. In conclusion, the superficial veins drain mainly into 
the superior sagittal sinus, which ultimately drains into the 
right internal jugular vein. On the other hand, the deep 
veins drain mainly into the great cerebral vein, which 
ultimately drains into the left internal jugular vein.
Subdural hemorrhage: It occurs due to rupture of cerebral 
veins in the subdural space. The cerebral veins while 
traversing the subdural space en route to drain into the dural 
venous sinuses have little support and are torn following 
moderate trauma on head. The superior cerebral veins are 
most commonly torn, where they enter the superior sagittal 
sinus. The cause is usually a blow on the front or back of the 
head, resulting in excessive anteroposterior displacement of 
the brain within the skull. Consequently the cerebral veins in 
the subdural space (called bridging veins) are unduly 
stretched and torn. The subdural hemorrhage is generally 
extensive because of the loose attachment between the 
dura and arachnoid.
Clinical correlation
--- Page 427 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
Golden Facts to Remember
  Most metabolically active organ in the body
Brain
  Circle of Willis
Polygonal arterial anastomosis between the 
branches of carotid and basilar arteries at the base 
of the brain
  Commonest cause of subarachnoid hemorrhage
Rupture of berry aneurysms in the circle of Willis
  Largest branch of cranial part of the vertebral 
artery
Posterior-inferior cerebellar artery
  Artery of cerebral thrombosis
Anterior choroidal artery
  Artery of cerebral hemorrhage
Charcot’s artery (larger lateral striate branch of 
middle cerebral artery)
  Most of the superolateral surface of the cerebral 
hemisphere is supplied by
Middle cerebral artery
  Most of the medial surface of the cerebral 
hemisphere is supplied by
Anterior cerebral artery
  Most of the inferior surface of the cerebral 
hemisphere is supplied by
Posterior cerebral artery
  Commonest cause of subdural hemorrhage
Rupture of superior cerebral veins (bridging veins)
A 65-year-old individual who was suffering from 
chronic high blood pressure suddenly suffered from 
contralateral hemiplegia, hemianesthesia, and loss of 
speech. He was taken to the hospital, where he was 
diagnosed as a case of cerebral stroke.
Questions
1. What is cerebral stroke?
2. Name the arteries which supply the cerebral 
hemisphere.
3. Which cerebral artery is likely to be involved in the 
given case?
Answers
1. A neurological deficit that follows the deprivation 
of the cerebral blood flow.
2. Anterior, middle, and posterior cerebral arteries.
3. Left middle cerebral artery, because it supplies the 
motor speech area.
Clinical Case Study
--- Page 428 ---
Multiple Choice Questions
CHAPTER 1
 1. The smooth elevated area between the eyebrows is 
called:
(a) Bregma
(b) Glabella
(c) Nasion
(d) Medial canthus
 2. The tragus of auricle is located in:
(a) Frontal region of head
(b) Nasal region of head
(c) Temporal region of head
(d) Zygomatic region of head
 3. The most prominent part of occipital regions of the 
head is called:
(a) Inion
(b) Opisthocranion
(c) Superior nuchal lines
(d) Basion
 4. Select incorrect statement regarding the auricle of the 
ear:
(a) It helps to collect the sound waves
(b) The upper end of helix lies at the level of lateral 
canthus of eye
(c) The lobule is approximately at the level of the apex 
of the nose
(d) The tragus is located anterior to the opening of 
external auditory meatus
 5. Regarding the lips, which of the following statement is 
not correct:
(a) Each lip is demarcated from the surrounding skin 
by vermillion border
(b) The philtrum is a triangular median depression in 
upper lip
(c) The width of lips is approximately the same as that 
between the two irises
(d) The lower lip is separated from the chin by labial 
commissure
 6. All of the following structures can be palpated in the 
anterior median region of the neck except:
(a) Hyoid bone
(b) Thyroid cartilage
(c) Transverse process of atlas vertebra
(d) Cricoid cartilage
 7. The junction between the labial/buccal mucosa and 
alveolar mucosa is called:
(a) Mucogingival junction
(b) Mucobuccal fold
(c) Vermillion border
(d) Labial frenulum
 8. Floor of the mouth presents all of the following features 
except:
(a) Sublingual papillae
(b) Sublingual folds
(c) Parotid papillae
(d) Frenulum linguae
 9. A midline ridge of tissue on the oral aspect of the hard 
palate is called:
(a) Incisive papilla
(b) Palatine rugae
(c) Median palatine raphe
(d) Sulcus terminalis
 10. All of the following structures traverse through the 
anterior compartment of the neck except:
(a) Digestive tract
(b) Respiratory tract
(c) Internal jugular veins
(d) Spinal cord
--- Page 429 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
 11. Into which cervical triangles does the sternocleidomas-
toid divide the neck:
(a) Medial and lateral
(b) Superior and inferior
(c) Anterior and posterior
(d) Proximal and distal
Answers
1. b, 2. c, 3. b, 4. b, 5. d, 6. c, 7. b, 8. c, 9. c, 10. d, 11. c
CHAPTER 2
 1. Bones of the skull which permit free movement are all 
except:
(a) Mandible
(b) Malleus
(c) Incus
(d) Vomer
 2. The area of the lateral aspect of skull that overlies the 
anterior division of middle meningeal artery is called:
(a) Bregma
(b) Asterion
(c) Pterion
(d) Inion
 3. Regarding pterion, all of the following statements are 
true except:
(a) It overlies the posterior division of middle 
meningeal artery
(b) It is region where four bones meet
(c) It is located 4 cm above the midpoint of the zygomatic 
arch
(d) Bones meeting at pterion form ‘H-shaped suture’
 4. Regarding spine of sphenoid, all of the following 
statements are true except:
(a) It is located on the base of skull posterolateral to the 
foramen spinosum
(b) It is related to auriculotemporal and chorda tympani 
nerves
(c) It provides attachment to levator palati muscle
(d) It provides attachment to sphenomandibular 
ligament
 5. All of the following structures pass through foramen 
ovale except:
(a) Mandibular nerve
(b) Anterior division of middle meningeal artery
(c) Lesser superficial petrosal nerve
(d) Emissary vein connecting pterygoid venous plexus 
to cavernous sinus
 6. Regarding mastoid process, all of the following 
statements are correct except:
(a) It is absent at birth
(b) It begins to develop at the end of the 2nd year after 
birth
(c) It contains tympanic cavity
(d) It provides attachment to posterior belly of digastric
 7. All of the following are common sties of fracture of the 
mandible except:
(a) Neck of mandible
(b) Angle of mandible
(c) Canine region of the body
(d) Symphysis menti
 8. All of the following foramina are present in the greater 
wing of sphenoid except:
(a) Foramen rotundum
(b) Foramen ovale
(c) Foramen lacerum
(d) Foramen spinosum
 9. Which of the following bones is not a sutural bone?
(a) Epipteric bone
(b) Inca bone
(c) OS Kerckring
(d) Interparietal bone
 10. In articulated skull, maxillary hiatus is reduced in size 
by all of the following bones except:
(a) Uncinate process of ethmoid
(b) Descending process of lacrimal
(c) Horizontal palate of palatine
(d) Maxillary process of inferior nasal concha
Answers
1. d, 2. c, 3. a, 4. c, 5. b, 6. c, 7. d, 8. c, 9. d, 10. c
CHAPTER 3
 1. Which layer of scalp is regarded as the ‘dangerous layer’:
(a) Subcutaneous layer
(b) Aponeurotic layer
(c) Layer of loose areolar tissue
(d) Pericranium
 2. Select the incorrect statement about the scalp:
(a) It extends posteriorly up to superior nuchal line
(b) Epicranial aponeurosis forms its second layer
(c) Its motor supply is derived from facial nerve
(d) Its vessels fail to retract if cut
 3. All of the following nerves innervate the posterior 
quadrant of the scalp except:
--- Page 430 ---
Multiple Choice Questions
(a) Auriculotemporal
(b) Great auricular
(c) Greater occipital
(d) Lesser occipital
 4. All of the following arteries supply the anterior 
quadrant of the scalp except:
(a) Supratrochlear
(b) Supraorbital
(c) Posterior auricular
(d) Superficial temporal
 5. Superficial surface of temporal fascia is related to all of 
the following structures except:
(a) Auriculotemporal nerve
(b) Great auricular nerve
(c) Superficial temporal vessels
(d) Temporal branches of facial nerve
 6. Regarding muscles of facial expression, which of the 
following statements is incorrect:
(a) They are present in the superficial fascia
(b) They are developed from first pharyngeal arch
(c) Their motor supply is derived from facial nerve
(d) Morphologically 
they 
represent 
panniculus 
carnosus
 7. Regarding Bell’s palsy, which of the following statements 
is not correct:
(a) It is a lower motor neuron type of paralysis of facial 
muscles
(b) The upper facial muscles are not affected
(c) It occurs due to compression of facial nerve in the 
facial canal
(d) It leads to accumulation of food in the vestibule of 
mouth
 8. Regarding lacrimal gland, which of the following 
statements is not correct:
(a) It consists of larger orbital and smaller palpebral 
part
(b) It is a mucous gland
(c) It receives its secretomotor supply through lacrimal 
nerve
(d) The two parts of lacrimal glands are separated from 
each other by levator palpebrae superioris
 9. Regarding eyelids which of the following statements is 
not correct:
(a) Tarsi forms the skeleton of the eyelids
(b) Free margin of eyelids carries eyelashes along its 
whole extent
(c) Openings of tarsal glands are present along the 
posterior edge of free margins of eyelids
(d) Openings of ciliary glands are located along the 
anterior edge of the free margin of eyelids
Answers
1. c, 2. b, 3. a, 4. c, 5. b, 6. b, 7. b, 8. b, 9. b
CHAPTER 4
 1. Regarding skin of neck, all of the following statements 
are correct except:
(a) Cleavage lines of skin in the neck are disposed 
transversely
(b) It receives cutaneous innervation from C1 to C7 
spinal nerves
(c) It receives cutaneous innervation from C2 to C4 
spinal nerves
(d) It is thin and drains its lymph into superficial lymph 
nodes
 2. Regarding platysma, all of the following statements are 
correct except:
(a) It is present deep to investing layer of deep cervical 
fascia
(b) Morphologically it represents panniculus carnosus
(c) It is innervated by the facial nerve
(d) Its contraction relieves the pressure of skin on 
superficial veins of the neck
 3. All of the following statements about external jugular 
vein are correct except:
(a) It is formed by the union of posterior division of 
retromandibular vein and posterior auricular vein
(b) It crosses sternocleidomastoid on its superficial 
aspect
(c) It pierces the deep cervical fascia about 2.5 cm above 
the clavicle
(d) It drains into internal jugular vein
 4. Select the incorrect statement regarding anterior 
jugular vein:
(a) It is formed below the chin in submental region
(b) It runs about 1 cm lateral to anterior midline of the 
neck
(c) It is joined with its counter part of opposite side by 
the jugular venous arch
(d) It drains into subclavian vein
 5. All of the following are derivatives of deep cervical fascia 
except:
(a) Pretracheal fascia
(b) Prevertebral fascia
(c) Stylomandibular ligament
(d) Sphenomandibular ligament
--- Page 431 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
 6. Superficial lymph nodes of neck consist of all of the 
following groups of lymph nodes except:
(a) Submental
(b) Submandibular
(c) Retroauricular
(d) Retropharyngeal
 7. ‘Suprasternal space of Burns’ contains all of the 
following structures except:
(a) Jugular venous arch
(b) Interclavicular ligament
(c) Terminal ends of external jugular veins
(d) Sternal heads of sternocleidomastoid muscles
 8. All of the following are contents of carotid sheath 
except:
(a) Internal carotid artery
(b) External carotid artery
(c) Internal jugular vein
(d) Vagus nerve
 9. Select the incorrect statement about the carotid sheath:
(a) It extends from base of skull to the clavicle
(b) The ansa cervicalis is embedded in its anterior wall
(c) It is ill defined over the internal jugular vein
(d) The cervical sympathetic chain is posterior to it
 10. Select the incorrect statement regarding cold abscess 
due to tubercular caries of cervical vertebrae:
(a) Produces paramedian bulge in the posterior 
pharyngeal wall
(b) Produces median bulge in the posterior pharyngeal 
wall
(c) It may extend into posterior triangle of the neck
(d) It may extend into axilla and arm
Answers
1. b, 2. a, 3. d, 4. d, 5. d, 6. d, 7. c, 8. b, 9. a, 10. a
CHAPTER 5
 1. All of the following muscles forms the floor of posterior 
triangle except:
(a) Splenius capitis
(b) Levator scapulae
(c) Scalenus medius
(d) Scalenus anterior
 2. All of the following structures lie deep to fascial carpet 
of posterior triangle except
(a) Trunks of brachial plexus
(b) Spinal accessory nerve
(c) Occipital artery
(d) Third part of subclavian artery
 3. Select the incorrect statement regarding the spinal 
accessory nerve:
(a) It emerges in the posterior triangle by piercing the 
posterior border of sternocleidomastoid
(b) It is related to lymph nodes belonging to upper deep 
cervical lymph nodes
(c) It runs parallel to the fibres of scalenus medius
(d) It supplies sternocleidomastoid and trapezius 
muscles
 4. All of the following nerves arise from cervical part of 
the brachial plexus except:
(a) Dorsal scapular nerve
(b) Nerve to serratus anterior
(c) Musculocutaneous nerve
(d) Suprascapular nerve
 5. Select 
incorrect 
statement 
regarding 
sternocleidomastoid muscle:
(a) It tilts the head to the same side
(b) It overlaps the carotid sheath
(c) It is supplied by the cranial root of accessory nerve
(d) It is crossed superficially by the external Jugular vein
 6. The sternocleidomastoid is crossed superficially by all 
of the following structures except:
(a) Lesser occipital nerve
(b) Great auricular nerve
(c) External jugular vein
(d) Transverse cervical nerve
 7. Which of the following lymph nodes are termed 
Virchow’s lymph nodes:
(a) Left infraclavicular
(b) Left supraclavicular
(c) Right infraclavicular
(d) Right supraclavicular
 8. All of the following structures pierce the roof of 
posterior triangle except:
(a) Anterior jugular vein
(b) External jugular vein
(c) Supraclavicular nerves
(d) Great auricular nerve
Answers
1. d, 2. b, 3. c, 4. c, 5. c, 6. a, 7. b, 8. a
--- Page 432 ---
Multiple Choice Questions
CHAPTER 6
 1. Select the incorrect statement about the mental triangle:
(a) It is located in the anterior median region of the 
neck
(b) Its floor is formed by the oral diaphragm
(c) It is bounded on either side by the posterior belly of 
digastric muscle
(d) Its base is formed by the body of hyoid bone
 2. All of the following structures form the boundaries of 
digastric triangle except:
(a) Posterior belly of digastric muscle
(b) Anterior belly of digastric muscle
(c) Superior belly of omohyoid muscle
(d) Base of the mandible
 3. All of the following structures pass between external 
and internal carotid arteries except:
(a) Stylopharyngeus muscle
(b) Superior laryngeal nerve
(c) Glossopharyngeal nerve
(d) Pharyngeal branch of vagus nerve
 4. Select the incorrect statement regarding the carotid sinus:
(a) It is fusiform dilatation at the beginning of the 
internal carotid artery
(b) It is innervated by vagus nerve
(c) It is innervated by glossopharyngeal nerve
(d) It acts as a pressure receptor
 5. All of the following arteries are present in the carotid 
triangle except:
(a) Ascending pharyngeal artery
(b) Lingual artery
(c) Sublingual artery
(d) Facial artery
 6. All of the following statements are true about the ansa 
cervicalis except:
(a) It is present in the region of carotid triangle
(b) It is formed by the ventral rami of C1, C2, and C3 
spinal nerves
(c) It supplies all the infrahyoid muscles
(d) It is embedded in the anterior wall of the carotid 
sheath
 7. ‘Strap’ muscles of the neck include all of the following 
muscles except:
(a) Sternocleidomastoid
(b) Sternothyroid
(c) Sternohyoid
(d) Thyrohyoid
 8. Which of the following strap muscles of the neck can 
elevate the larynx if hyoid is fixed:
(a) Sternohyoid
(b) Omohyoid
(c) Sternothyroid
(d) Thyrohyoid
 9. The thyrohyoid muscle is supplied by:
(a) Superior root of ansa cervicalis
(b) Inferior root of ansa cervicalis
(c) Ventral ramus of first cervical nerve through 
hypoglossal nerve
(d) Ventral ramus of first cervical nerve through 
superior laryngeal nerve
 10. Hypoglossal nerve crosses superficial to all of the 
following arteries except:
(a) Internal carotid artery
(b) External carotid artery
(c) Facial artery
(d) Loop of lingual artery
Answers
1. c, 2. c, 3. b, 4. b, 5. c, 6. c, 7. a, 8. d, 9. c, 10. c
CHAPTER 7
 1. All of the following nerves provide cutaneous 
innervation on the back of neck except:
(a) Lesser occipital nerve
(b) Greater occipital nerve
(c) Third occipital nerve
(d) Cutaneous branches of C4 and C5
 2. Regarding ligamentum nuchae, all of the following 
statements are correct except:
(a) Its free posterior border extents from external 
occipital protuberance to the spine of the cervical 
vertebra
(b) It is better developed and more elastic in humans 
than in quadruped
(c) It forms the septum between the muscles of the two 
sides of the back of the neck
(d) It consists of a number of elastic fibres
 3. From the following statements select the incorrect 
statement about the trapezius muscle:
(a) It arises from lateral third of the superior nuchal 
line
(b) Its lower part is inserted into the tubercle on the 
spine of scapula
(c) It is supplied by the spinal accessory nerve
(d) Its upper fibres help in shrugging the shoulder
--- Page 433 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
 4. The contents of suboccipital triangle includes all except:
(a) Third part of vertebral artery
(b) Suboccipital nerve
(c) Occipital artery
(d) Suboccipital venous plexus
 5. All of the following statements regarding suboccipital 
triangle are correct except:
(a) Its roof is covered by semispinalis capitis and 
longissimus capitis
(b) Its floor is formed by anterior arch of the atlas
(c) It is bounded inferiorly by oblique capitis inferior
(d) It is bounded superolaterally by obliquus capitis 
superior
 6. The dorsal ramus first cervical nerve supplies all of the 
following muscles except:
(a) Rectus capitis posterior major
(b) Rectus capitis posterior minor
(c) Semispinalis capitis
(d) Splenius capitis
 7. The joints of neck include all of the following varieties 
except:
(a) Symphyses
(b) Syndesmoses
(c) Sutures
(d) Synovial
 8. Select the incorrect statement about the intervertebral 
disc:
(a) Its outer part is made up of annulus fibrosus
(b) Its inner part is made up of nucleus pulposus
(c) It along with hyaline cartilages forms the 
intervertebral symphysis
(d) It is thicker posteriorly in the cervical region
 9. All of the following are true statements about the 
ligamentum nuchae except:
(a) Its posterior border extends from external occipital 
protuberance to the spine of C7
(b) It is bilaminar in nature
(c) It is predominantly made up fibroelastic tissue
(d) It is weak in quadrupeds
 10. Select the incorrect statement about the atlanto-occipital 
joints:
(a) They are synovial joints of ellipsoid variety
(b) They are two in number
(c) They are responsible for rotatory movements of the 
head
(d) They are supplied by first cervical nerve
 11. Select the incorrect statement about the median 
atlanto-axial joint:
(a) It is a synovial joint of pivot variety
(b) It has two joint cavities
(c) It is formed between the dens of axis and osseo- 
ligamentous ring formed by the anterior arch and 
transverse ligament of atlas
(d) It is responsible for ‘yes movement’ of head
 12. Select the incorrect statement about the atlantoaxial 
joints:
(a) They are 3 in number
(b) Lateral atlantoaxial joints are synovial joints of 
plane variety
(c) Median atlantoaxial joint is a synovial joint of pivot 
type
(d) The movements at all the atlantoaxial joints do not 
occur simultaneously
 13. Which of the following structures represents the 
remnant of notochord?
(a) Alar ligaments of dens
(b) Membrana tectoria
(c) Apical ligament of dens
(d) Upper longitudinal band of transverse ligament of 
atlas
Answers
1. a, 2. b, 3. a, 4. c, 5. b, 6. d, 7. c, 8. d, 9. d, 10. c, 11. d, 12. d,
13. c
CHAPTER 8
 1. The parotid gland develops from:
(a) Ectoderm
(b) Endoderm
(c) Mesoderm
(d) None of the above
 2. Select the correct statement about the parotid gland:
(a) It is located in the retromandibular fossa
(b) It is composed mainly of mucous acini
(c) It gets its secretomotor supply through facial nerve
(d) It is devoid of capsule
 3. All of the following structures emerge underneath the 
anterior border of the parotid gland except:
(a) Zygomatic branch of the facial nerve
(b) Parotid duct
(c) Retromandibular vein
(d) Transverse facial vessels
 4. All of the following structures lie within the parotid 
gland except:
(a) Facial nerve
(b) Retromandibular vein
--- Page 434 ---
Multiple Choice Questions
(c) Internal carotid artery
(d) External carotid artery
 5. All of the following structures are pierced by the parotid 
duct except:
(a) Buccal pad of fat
(b) Buccinator muscle
(c) Pharyngobasilar fascia
(d) Buccopharyngeal fascia
 6. Select the incorrect statement about the parotid duct:
(a) It is 5 cm long
(b) It is also called Wharton duct
(c) It emerges from the middle of the anterior border of 
the parotid gland
(d) It turns inwards at the anterior border of masseter
 7. The parotid duct opens in the vestibule of mouth 
opposite the crown of which of the following tooth:
(a) Upper first molar
(b) Upper second molar
(c) Upper third molar
(d) Upper first premolar
 8. The secretory function of parotid gland is likely to be 
affected by:
(a) Severe or prolonged middle ear infection
(b) Facial nerve palsy
(c) Severing of the glossopharyngeal nerve as it winds 
around the stylopharyngeus muscle
(d) None of the above
 9. The deep lamina of parotid capsule thickens to form:
(a) Sphenomandibular ligament
(b) Stylohyoid ligament
(c) Stylomandibular ligament
(d) All of the above
 10. The secretomotor fibres to the parotid are conveyed 
through the:
(a) Greater superficial petrosal nerve
(b) Auriculotemporal nerve
(c) Chorda tympani nerve
(d) Pharyngeal branch of the glossopharyngeal nerve
 11. Select the incorrect statement about the parotid capsule:
(a) It is derived from investing layer of deep cervical 
fascia
(b) It consists of superficial and deep laminae
(c) Its superficial lamina is thick and unyielding
(d) It is derived from prevertebral layer of deep cervical 
fascia
 12. Bony boundaries of the parotid bed are formed by all 
except:
(a) Posterior border of the ramus of mandible
(b) Mastoid process
(c) Styloid process
(d) Internal acoustic meatus
 13. ‘Mixed parotid tumor’ commonly involves:
(a) Superficial part of the parotid gland including facial 
nerve
(b) Superficial part of the parotid gland without 
involving facial nerve
(c) Deep part of the parotid gland including facial nerve
(d) Deep part of the parotid gland without involving 
facial nerve
Answers
1. a, 2. a, 3. c, 4. c, 5. c, 6. b, 7. b, 8. a, 9. c, 10. b, 11. d, 12. d,
13. b
CHAPTER 9
 1. Regarding digastric muscle, all of the following statement 
are true except:
(a) Its posterior belly is bipinnate and is supplied by the 
facial nerve
(b) Its anterior belly is unipinnate and is supplied by the 
man dibular nerve
(c) Its intermedial tendon is anchored to hyoid bone of 
a fascial sling
(d) It helps to elevate the mandible
 2. The superficial relation of hyoglossus muscle includes 
all except:
(a) Lingual nerve
(b) Lingual artery
(c) Hypoglossal nerve
(d) Deep part of sublingual gland
 3. All of the following structures pass deep to posterior 
border of hyoglossus except:
(a) Glossopharyngeal nerve
(b) Stylohyoid muscle
(c) Stylohyoid ligament
(d) Lingual artery
 4. All of the following statements regarding genioglossus 
muscle are correct except:
(a) It arises from superior genial tubercle
(b) It is called ‘safety-muscle’ of the tongue
(c) It along with its counterpart of opposite side 
protrude the tongue
(d) It alone protrudes the tongue to the same side
 5. The swellings of submandibular gland are bimanually 
palpable because:
--- Page 435 ---
Textbook of Anatomy: Head, Neck, and Brain
(a) It lies superficial to mylohyoid muscle outside the 
oral cavity
(b) Its deep part lies in the oral cavity and superficial 
part outside the oral cavity
(c) It is wedged between the mandible and mylohyoid 
muscle
(d) It is immediately deep to the oral mucosa
 6. Select the incorrect statement about the submandibular 
gland:
(a) It develops from endoderm
(b) It consists of superficial and deep parts
(c) Its duct opens into the vestibule of the oral cavity
(d) It is grooved by the facial artery
 7. Which of the following nerves crosses the duct of the 
submandibular gland?
(a) Glossopharyngeal nerve
(b) Hypoglossal nerve
(c) Lingual nerve
(d) Chorda tympani nerve
 8. Select the correct statement about the sublingual gland:
(a) It is drained by a single duct
(b) It lies inside the oral cavity between mucous 
membrane and genioglossus muscle
(c) It receives postganglionic secretomotor fibres from 
otic ganglion
(d) It is composed mainly of serous acini
 9. The postganglionic secretomotor fibres to sublingual 
gland pass through which of the following nerves:
(a) Lingual nerve
(b) Chorda tympani nerve
(c) Glossopharyngeal nerve
(d) Hypoglossal nerve
 10. A correct statement about the submandibular ganglion 
(a) It is functionally related to the facial nerve
(b) It is situated on the inner surface of the hyoglossus 
muscle
(c) It lies above the lingual nerve
(d) It supplies preganglionic parasympathetic fibres to 
submandibular and sublingual salivary glands
Answers
1. d, 2. b, 3. b, 4. d, 5. b, 6. c, 7. c, 8. b, 9. a, 10. a
CHAPTER 10
 1. Select the incorrect statement about the infratemporal 
fossa:
(a) It is located deep to the ramus of mandible
(b) It contains medial and lateral pterygoid muscles
(c) It communicates with pterygopalatine fossa
(d) It contains submandibular parasympathetic ganglion
 2. All of the following structures occupy the infratemporal 
fossa except:
(a) Mandibular nerve
(b) Chorda tympani nerve
(c) Pterygoid venous plexus
(d) Masseter muscle
 3. All of the following structures lie deep to lateral 
pterygoid muscle except:
(a) Middle meningeal artery
(b) Mandibular nerve
(c) Superficial head of medial pterygoid
(d) Sphenomandibular ligament
 4. All of the following nerves derived from anterior division 
of the mandibular nerve are motor except:
(a) Masseteric nerve
(b) Buccal nerve
(c) Nerve to lateral pterygoid
(d) Deep temporal nerves
 5. All of the following arteries arise from the first part of 
maxillary artery except:
(a) Middle meningeal artery
(b) Posterior superior alveolar artery
(c) Inferior alveolar artery
(d) Accessory middle meningeal artery
 6. Select the incorrect statement about the otic ganglion:
(a) It is functionally related to mandibular nerve
(b) Its topographically related to mandibular nerve
(c) It is 2–3 mm in size
(d) It is located lateral to tensor palati muscle
 7. Nerve to medial pterygoid supplies all of the following 
muscles except:
(a) Tensor palati
(b) Medial pterygoid
(c) Lateral pterygoid
(d) Tensor tympani
 8. Select the incorrect statement about the temporoman-
dibular joint:
(a) It is synovial joint of condylar variety
(b) Its cavity is divided into two compartments by an 
intra-articular disc
(c) Its articular surfaces are covered by hyaline cartilage
(d) It is innervated by auriculotemporal and masseteric 
nerves
 9. Which of the following muscles opens the mouth:
(a) Temporalis